When I worked in a second-hand bookshop — so easily pictured, if you don’t work in one, as a kind of
paradise where charming old gentlemen browse eternally among calf-bound folios — the thing that chiefly struck me was
the rarity of really bookish people. Our shop had an exceptionally interesting stock, yet I doubt whether ten per cent
of our customers knew a good book from a bad one. First edition snobs were much commoner than lovers of literature, but
oriental students haggling over cheap textbooks were commoner still, and vague-minded women looking for birthday
presents for their nephews were commonest of all.
Many of the people who came to us were of the kind who would be a nuisance anywhere but have special opportunities
in a bookshop. For example, the dear old lady who ‘wants a book for an invalid’ (a very common demand, that), and the
other dear old lady who read such a nice book in 1897 and wonders whether you can find her a copy. Unfortunately she
doesn’t remember the title or the author’s name or what the book was about, but she does remember that it had a red
cover. But apart from these there are two well-known types of pest by whom every second-hand bookshop is haunted. One
is the decayed person smelling of old breadcrusts who comes every day, sometimes several times a day, and tries to sell
you worthless books. The other is the person who orders large quantities of books for which he has not the smallest
intention of paying. In our shop we sold nothing on credit, but we would put books aside, or order them if necessary,
for people who arranged to fetch them away later. Scarcely half the people who ordered books from us ever came back. It
used to puzzle me at first. What made them do it? They would come in and demand some rare and expensive book, would
make us promise over and over again to keep it for them, and then would vanish never to return. But many of them, of
course, were unmistakable paranoiacs. They used to talk in a grandiose manner about themselves and tell the most
ingenious stories to explain how they had happened to come out of doors without any money — stories which, in many
cases, I am sure they themselves believed. In a town like London there are always plenty of not quite certifiable
lunatics walking the streets, and they tend to gravitate towards bookshops, because a bookshop is one of the few places
where you can hang about for a long time without spending any money. In the end one gets to know these people almost at
a glance. For all their big talk there is something moth-eaten and aimless about them. Very often, when we were dealing
with an obvious paranoiac, we would put aside the books he asked for and then put them back on the shelves the moment
he had gone. None of them, I noticed, ever attempted to take books away without paying for them; merely to order them
was enough — it gave them, I suppose, the illusion that they were spending real money.
Like most second-hand bookshops we had various sidelines. We sold second-hand typewriters, for instance, and also
stamps — used stamps, I mean. Stamp-collectors are a strange, silent, fish-like breed, of all ages, but only of the
male sex; women, apparently, fail to see the peculiar charm of gumming bits of coloured paper into albums. We also sold
sixpenny horoscopes compiled by somebody who claimed to have foretold the Japanese earthquake. They were in sealed
envelopes and I never opened one of them myself, but the people who bought them often came back and told us how ‘true’
their horoscopes had been. (Doubtless any horoscope seems ‘true’ if it tells you that you are highly attractive to the
opposite sex and your worst fault is generosity.) We did a good deal of business in children’s books, chiefly
‘remainders’. Modern books for children are rather horrible things, especially when you see them in the mass.
Personally I would sooner give a child a copy of Petronius Arbiter than PETER PAN, but even Barrie seems manly and
wholesome compared with some of his later imitators. At Christmas time we spent a feverish ten days struggling with
Christmas cards and calendars, which are tiresome things to sell but good business while the season lasts. It used to
interest me to see the brutal cynicism with which Christian sentiment is exploited. The touts from the Christmas card
firms used to come round with their catalogues as early as June. A phrase from one of their invoices sticks in my
memory. It was: ‘2 doz. Infant Jesus with rabbits’.
But our principal sideline was a lending library — the usual ‘twopenny no-deposit’ library of five or six hundred
volumes, all fiction. How the book thieves must love those libraries! It is the easiest crime in the world to borrow a
book at one shop for twopence, remove the label and sell it at another shop for a shilling. Nevertheless booksellers
generally find that it pays them better to have a certain number of books stolen (we used to lose about a dozen a
month) than to frighten customers away by demanding a deposit.
Our shop stood exactly on the frontier between Hampstead and Camden Town, and we were frequented by all types from
baronets to bus-conductors. Probably our library subscribers were a fair cross-section of London’s reading public. It
is therefore worth noting that of all the authors in our library the one who ‘went out’ the best was — Priestley?
Hemingway? Walpole? Wodehouse? No, Ethel M. Dell, with Warwick Deeping a good second and Jeffrey Farnol, I should say,
third. Dell’s novels, of course, are read solely by women, but by women of all kinds and ages and not, as one might
expect, merely by wistful spinsters and the fat wives of tobacconists. It is not true that men don’t read novels, but
it is true that there are whole branches of fiction that they avoid. Roughly speaking, what one might call the AVERAGE
novel — the ordinary, good-bad, Galsworthy-and-water stuff which is the norm of the English novel — seems to exist only
for women. Men read either the novels it is possible to respect, or detective stories. But their consumption of
detective stories is terrific. One of our subscribers to my knowledge read four or five detective stories every week
for over a year, besides others which he got from another library. What chiefly surprised me was that he never read the
same book twice. Apparently the whole of that frightful torrent of trash (the pages read every year would, I
calculated, cover nearly three quarters of an acre) was stored for ever in his memory. He took no notice of titles or
author’s names, but he could tell by merely glancing into a book whether be had ‘had it already’.
In a lending library you see people’s real tastes, not their pretended ones, and one thing that strikes you is how
completely the ‘classical’ English novelists have dropped out of favour. It is simply useless to put Dickens,
Thackeray, Jane Austen, Trollope, etc. into the ordinary lending library; nobody takes them out. At the mere sight of a
nineteenth-century novel people say, ‘Oh, but that’s OLD!’ and shy away immediately. Yet it is always fairly easy to
SELL Dickens, just as it is always easy to sell Shakespeare. Dickens is one of those authors whom people are ‘always
meaning to’ read, and, like the Bible, he is widely known at second hand. People know by hearsay that Bill Sikes was a
burglar and that Mr Micawber had a bald head, just as they know by hearsay that Moses was found in a basket of
bulrushes and saw the ‘back parts’ of the Lord. Another thing that is very noticeable is the growing unpopularity of
American books. And another — the publishers get into a stew about this every two or three years — is the unpopularity
of short stories. The kind of person who asks the librarian to choose a book for him nearly always starts by saying ‘I
don’t want short stories’, or ‘I do not desire little stories’, as a German customer of ours used to put it. If you ask
them why, they sometimes explain that it is too much fag to get used to a new set of characters with every story; they
like to ‘get into’ a novel which demands no further thought after the first chapter. I believe, though, that the
writers are more to blame here than the readers. Most modern short stories, English and American, are utterly lifeless
and worthless, far more so than most novels. The short stories which are stories are popular enough, VIDE D. H.
Lawrence, whose short stories are as popular as his novels.
Would I like to be a bookseller DE MÉTIER? On the whole — in spite of my employer’s kindness to me, and some happy
days I spent in the shop — no.
Given a good pitch and the right amount of capital, any educated person ought to be able to make a small secure
living out of a bookshop. Unless one goes in for ‘rare’ books it is not a difficult trade to learn, and you start at a
great advantage if you know anything about the insides of books. (Most booksellers don’t. You can get their measure by
having a look at the trade papers where they advertise their wants. If you don’t see an ad. for Boswell’s DECLINE AND
FALL you are pretty sure to see one for THE MILL ON THE FLOSS by T. S. Eliot.) Also it is a humane trade which is not
capable of being vulgarized beyond a certain point. The combines can never squeeze the small independent bookseller out
of existence as they have squeezed the grocer and the milkman. But the hours of work are very long — I was only a
part-time employee, but my employer put in a seventy-hour week, apart from constant expeditions out of hours to buy
books — and it is an unhealthy life. As a rule a bookshop is horribly cold in winter, because if it is too warm the
windows get misted over, and a bookseller lives on his windows. And books give off more and nastier dust than any other
class of objects yet invented, and the top of a book is the place where every bluebottle prefers to die.
But the real reason why I should not like to be in the book trade for life is that while I was in it I lost my love
of books. A bookseller has to tell lies about books, and that gives him a distaste for them; still worse is the fact
that he is constantly dusting them and hauling them to and fro. There was a time when I really did love books — loved
the sight and smell and feel of them, I mean, at least if they were fifty or more years old. Nothing pleased me quite
so much as to buy a job lot of them for a shilling at a country auction. There is a peculiar flavour about the battered
unexpected books you pick up in that kind of collection: minor eighteenth-century poets, out-of-date gazeteers, odd
volumes of forgotten novels, bound numbers of ladies’ magazines of the sixties. For casual reading — in your bath, for
instance, or late at night when you are too tired to go to bed, or in the odd quarter of an hour before lunch — there
is nothing to touch a back number of the Girl’s Own Paper. But as soon as I went to work in the bookshop I stopped
buying books. Seen in the mass, five or ten thousand at a time, books were boring and even slightly sickening. Nowadays
I do buy one occasionally, but only if it is a book that I want to read and can’t borrow, and I never buy junk. The
sweet smell of decaying paper appeals to me no longer. It is too closely associated in my mind with paranoiac customers
and dead bluebottles.
