As you travel northward your eye, accustomed to the South or East, does not notice much difference
until you are beyond Birmingham. In Coventry you might as well be in Finsbury Park, and the Bull Ring in Birmingham is
not unlike Norwich Market, and between all the towns of the Midlands there stretches a villa-civilization
indistinguishable from that of the South. It is only when you get a little further north, to the pottery towns and
beyond, that you begin to encounter the real ugliness of industrialism — an ugliness so frightful and so arresting that
you are obliged, as it were, to come to terms with it.
A slag-heap is at best a hideous thing, because it is so planless and functionless. It is something just dumped on
the earth, like the emptying of a giant’s dust-bin. On the outskirts of the mining towns there are frightful landscapes
where your horizon is ringed completely round by jagged grey mountains, and underfoot is mud and ashes and over-head
the steel cables where tubs of dirt travel slowly across miles of country. Often the slag-heaps are on fire, and at
night you can see the red rivulets of fire winding this way and that, and also the slow-moving blue flames of sulphur,
which always seem on the point of expiring and always spring out again. Even when a slag-heap sinks, as it does
ultimately, only an evil brown grass grows on it, and it retains its hummocky surface. One in the slums of Wigan, used
as a playground, looks like a choppy sea suddenly frozen; ‘the flock mattress’, it is called locally. Even centuries
hence when the plough drives over the places where coal was once mined, the sites of ancient slag-heaps will still be
distinguishable from an aeroplane.
I remember a winter afternoon in the dreadful environs of Wigan. All round was the lunar landscape of slag-heaps,
and to the north, through the passes, as it were, between the mountains of slag, you could see the factory chimneys
sending out their plumes of smoke. The canal path was a mixture of cinders and frozen mud, criss-crossed by the
imprints of innumerable clogs, and all round, as far as the slag-heaps in the distance, stretched the ‘flashes’— pools
of stagnant water that had seeped into the hollows caused by the subsidence of ancient pits. It was horribly cold. The
‘flashes’ were covered with ice the colour of raw umber, the bargemen were muffled to the eyes in sacks, the lock gates
wore beards of ice. It seemed a world from which vegetation had been banished; nothing existed except smoke, shale,
ice, mud, ashes, and foul water. But even Wigan is beautiful compared with Sheffield. Sheffield, I suppose, could
justly claim to be called the ugliest town in the Old World: its inhabitants, who want it to be pre-eminent in
everything, very likely do make that claim for it. It has a population of half a million and it contains fewer decent
buildings than the average East Anglian village of five hundred. And the stench! If at rare moments you stop smelling
sulphur it is because you have begun smelling gas. Even the shallow river that runs through the town is-usually bright
yellow with some chemical or other. Once I halted in the street and counted the factory chimneys I could see; there
were thirty-three of them, but there would have been far more if the air had not been obscured by smoke. One scene
especially lingers in my mind. A frightful patch of waste ground (somehow, up there, a patch of waste ground attains a
squalor that would be impossible even in London) trampled bare of grass and littered with newspapers and old saucepans.
To the right an isolated row of gaunt four-roomed houses, dark red, blackened by smoke. To the left an interminable
vista of factory chimneys, chimney beyond chimney, fading away into a dim blackish haze. Behind me a railway embankment
made of the slag from furnaces. In front, across the patch of waste ground, a cubical building of red and yellow brick,
with the sign ‘Thomas Grocock, Haulage Contractor’.
At night, when you cannot see the hideous shapes of the houses and the blackness of everything, a town like
Sheffield assumes a kind of sinister magnificence. Sometimes the drifts of smoke are rosy with sulphur, and serrated
flames, like circular saws, squeeze themselves out from beneath the cowls of the foundry chimneys. Through the open
doors of foundries you see fiery serpents of iron being hauled to and fro by redlit boys, and you hear the whizz and
thump of steam hammers and the scream of the iron under the blow. The pottery towns are almost equally ugly in a
pettier way. Right in among the rows of tiny blackened houses, part of the street as it were, are the ‘pot banks’—
conical brick chimneys like gigantic burgundy bottles buried in the soil and belching their smoke almost in your face.
You come upon monstrous clay chasms hundreds of feet across and almost as deep, with little rusty tubs creeping on
chain railways up one side, and on the other workmen clinging like samphire-gatherers and cutting into the face of the
cliff with their picks. I passed that way in snowy weather, and even the snow was black. The best thing one can say for
the pottery towns is that they are fairly small and stop abruptly. Less than ten miles away you can stand in un-defiled
country, on the almost naked hills, and the pottery towns are only a smudge in the distance.
When you contemplate such ugliness as this, there are two questions that strike you. First, is it inevitable?
Secondly, does it matter?
I do not believe that there is anything inherently and unavoidably ugly about industrialism. A factory or even a
gasworks is not obliged of its own nature to be ugly, any more than a palace or a dog-kennel or a cathedral. It all
depends on the architectural tradition of the period. The industrial towns of the North are ugly because they happen to
have been built at a time when modem methods of steel-construction and smoke-abatement were unknown, and when everyone
was too busy making money to think about anything else. They go on being ugly largely because the Northerners have got
used to that kind of thing and do not notice it. Many of the people in Sheffield or Manchester, if they smelled the air
along the Cornish cliffs, would probably declare that it had no taste in it. But since the war, industry has tended to
shift southward and in doing so has grown almost comely. The typical post-war factory is not a gaunt barrack or an
awful chaos of blackness and belching chimneys; it is a glittering white structure of concrete, glass, and steel,
surrounded by green lawns and beds of tulips. Look at the factories you pass as you travel out of London on the G.W.R.;
they may not be aesthetic triumphs but certainly they are not ugly in the same way as the Sheffield gasworks. But in
any case, though the ugliness of industrialism is the most obvious thing about it and the thing every newcomer exclaims
against, I doubt whether it is centrally important. And perhaps it is not even desirable, industrialism being what it
is, that it should learn to disguise itself as something else. As Mr Aldous Huxley has truly remarked, a dark Satanic
mill ought to look like a dark Satanic mill and not like the temple of mysterious and splendid gods. Moreover, even in
the worst of the industrial towns one sees a great deal that is not ugly in the narrow aesthetic sense. A belching
chimney or a stinking slum is repulsive chiefly because it implies warped lives and ailing children. Look at it from a
purely aesthetic standpoint and it may, have a certain macabre appeal. I find that anything outrageously strange
generally ends by fascinating me even when I abominate it. The landscapes of Burma, which, when I was among them, so
appalled me as to assume the qualities of nightmare, afterwards stayed so hauntingly in my mind that I was obliged to
write a novel about them to get rid of them. (In all novels about the East the scenery is the real subject-matter.) It
would probably be quite easy to extract a sort of beauty, as Arnold Bennett did, from the blackness of the industrial
towns; one can easily imagine Baudelaire, for instance, writing a poem about a slag-heap. But the beauty or ugliness of
industrialism hardly matters. Its real evil lies far deeper and is quite uneradicable. It is important to remember
this, because there is always a temptation to think that industrialism is harmless so long as it is clean and
orderly.
But when you go to the industrial North you are conscious, quite apart from the unfamiliar scenery, of entering a
strange country. This is partly because of certain real differences which do exist, but still more because of the
North-South antithesis which has been rubbed into us for such a long time past. There exists in England a curious cult
of Northernness, sort of Northern snobbishness. A Yorkshireman in the South will always take care to let you know that
he regards you as an inferior. If you ask him why, he will explain that it is only in the North that life is ‘real’
life, that the industrial work done in the North is the only ‘real’ work, that the North is inhabited by ‘real’ people,
the South merely by rentiers and their parasites. The Northerner has ‘grit’, he is grim, ‘dour’, plucky, warm-hearted,
and democratic; the Southerner is snobbish, effeminate, and lazy — that at any rate is the theory. Hence the Southerner
goes north, at any rate for the first time, with the vague inferiority-complex of a civilized man venturing among
savages, while the Yorkshireman, like the Scotchman, comes to London in the spirit of a barbarian out for loot. And
feelings of this kind, which are the result of tradition, are not affected by visible facts. Just as an Englishman five
feet four inches high and twenty-nine inches round the chest feels that as an Englishman he is the physical superior of
Camera (Camera being a Dago), so also with the Northerner and the Southerner. I remember a weedy little Yorkshireman,
who would almost certainly have run away if a fox-terrier had snapped at him, telling me that in the South of England
he felt ‘like a wild invader’. But the cult is often adopted by people who are not by birth Northerners themselves. A
year or two ago a friend of mine, brought up in the South but now living in the North, was driving me through Suffolk
in a car. We passed through a rather beautiful village. He glanced disapprovingly at the cottages and said:
‘Of course most of the villages in Yorkshire are hideous; but the Yorkshiremen are splendid chaps. Down here it’s
just the other way about — beautiful villages and rotten people. All the people in those cottages there are worthless,
absolutely worthless.’
I could not help inquiring whether he happened to know anybody in that village. No, he did not know them; but
because this was East Anglia they were obviously worthless. Another friend of mine, again a Southerner by birth, loses
no opportunity of praising the North to the detriment of the South. Here is an extract from one of his letters to
me:
I am in Clitheroe, Lanes. . . . I think running water is much more attractive in moor and mountain country
than in the fat and sluggish South. ‘The smug and silver Trent,’ Shakespeare says; and the South-er the smugger, I
say.
Here you have an interesting example of the Northern cult. Not only are you and I and everyone else in the South of
England written off as ‘fat and sluggish’, but even water when it gets north of a certain latitude, ceases to be H2O
and becomes something mystically superior. But the interest of this passage is that its writer is an extremely
intelligent man of ‘advanced’ opinions who would have nothing but con-tempt for nationalism in its ordinary form. Put
to him some such proposition as ‘One Britisher is worth three foreigners’, and he would repudiate it with horror. But
when it is a question of North versus South, he is quite ready to generalize. All nationalistic distinctions — all
claims to be better than somebody else because you have a different-shaped skull or speak a different dialect — are
entirely spurious, but they are important so long as people believe in them. There is no doubt about the Englishman’s
inbred conviction that those who live to the south of him are his inferiors; even our foreign policy is governed by it
to some extent. I think, therefore, that it is worth pointing out when and why it came into being.
When nationalism first became a religion, the English looked at the map, and, noticing that their island lay very
high in the Northern Hemisphere, evolved the pleasing theory that the further north you live the more virtuous you
become. The histories I was given when I was a little boy generally started off by explaining in the naivest way that a
cold climate made people energetic while a hot one made them lazy, and hence the defeat of the Spanish Armada. This
nonsense about the superior energy of the English (actually the laziest people in Europe) has been current for at least
a hundred years. ‘Better is it for us’, writes a Quarterly Reviewer of 1827, ‘to be condemned to labour for our
country’s good than to luxuriate amid olives, vines, and vices.’ ‘Olives, vines, and vices’ sums up the normal English
attitude towards the Latin races. In the mythology of Carlyle, Creasey, etc., the Northerner (‘Teutonic’, later
‘Nordic’) is pictured as a hefty, vigorous chap with blond moustaches and pure morals, while the Southerner is sly,
cowardly, and licentious. This theory was never pushed to its logical end, which would have meant assuming that the
finest people in the world were the Eskimos, but it did involve admitting that the people who lived to the north of us
were superior to ourselves. Hence, partly, the cult of Scotland and of Scotch things which has so deeply marked English
life during the past fifty years. But it was the industrialization of the North that gave the North-South antithesis
its peculiar slant. Until comparatively recently the northern part of England was the backward and feudal part, and
such industry as existed was concentrated in London and the South-East. In the Civil War for instance, roughly speaking
a war of money versus feudalism, the North and West were for the King and the South and East for the Parliament. But
with the increasing use of coal industry passed to the North, and there grew up a new type of man, the self-made
Northern business man — the Mr Rouncewell and Mr Bounderby of Dickens. The Northern business man, with his hateful ‘get
on or get out’ philosophy, was the dominant figure of the nineteenth century, and as a sort of tyrannical corpse he
rules us still. This is the type edified by Arnold Bennett — the type who starts off with half a crown and ends up with
fifty thousand pounds, and whose chief pride is to be an even greater boor after he has made his money than before. On
analysis his sole virtue turns out to be a talent for making money. We were bidden to admire him because though he
might be narrow-minded, sordid, ignorant, grasping, and uncouth, he had ‘grit’, he ‘got on’; in other words, he knew
how to make money.
This kind of cant is nowadays a pure anachronism, for the Northern business man is no longer prosperous. But
traditions are not killed by facts, and the tradition of Northern’ grit’ lingers. It is still dimly felt that a
Northerner will ‘get on’, i.e. make money, where a Southerner will fail. At the back of the mind of every Yorkshireman
and every Scotchman who comes to London is a sort of Dick Whittington picture of himself as the boy who starts off by
selling newspapers and ends up as Lord Mayor. And that, really, is at the bottom of his bumptiousness. But where one
can make a great mistake is in imagining that this feeling extends to the genuine working class. When I first went to
Yorkshire, some years ago, I imagined that I was going to a country of boors. I was used to the London Yorkshireman
with his interminable harangues and his pride in the supposed raciness of his dialect (’ “A stitch in time saves nine”,
as we say in the West Riding’), and I expected to meet with a good deal of rudeness. But I met with nothing of the
kind, and least of all among the miners. Indeed the Lancashire and Yorkshire miners treated me with a kindness and
courtesy that were even embarrassing; for if there is one type of man to whom I do feel myself inferior, it is a
coal-miner. Certainly no one showed any sign of despising me for coming from a different part of the country. This has
its importance when one remembers that the English regional snobberies are nationalism in miniature; for it suggests
that place-snobbery is not a working-class characteristic.
There is nevertheless a real difference between North and South, and there is at least a tinge of truth in that
picture of Southern England as one enormous Brighton inhabited by lounge-lizards. For climatic reasons the parasitic
divi-dend-drawing class tend to settle in the South. In a Lancashire cotton-town you could probably go for months on
end without once hearing an ‘educated’ accent, whereas there can hardly be a town in the South of England where you
could throw a brick without hitting the niece of a bishop. Consequently, with no petty gentry to set the pace, the
bourgeoisification of the working class, though it is taking place in the North, is taking place more slowly. All the
Northern accents, for instance, persist strongly, while the Southern ones are collapsing before the movies and the
B.B.C. Hence your ‘educated’ accent stamps you rather as a foreigner than as a chunk of the petty gentry; and this is
an immense advantage, for it makes it much easier to get into contact with the working class.
But is it ever possible to be really intimate with the working class? I shall have to discuss that later; I will
only say here that I do not think it is possible. But undoubtedly it is easier in the North than it would be in the
South to meet working-class people on approximately equal terms. It is fairly easy to live in a miner’s house and be
accepted as one of the family; with, say, a farm labourer in the Southern counties it probably would be impossible. I
have seen just enough of the working class to avoid idealizing them, but I do know that you can learn a great deal in a
working-class home, if only you can get there. The essential point is that your middle-class ideals and prejudices are
tested by contact with others which are not necessarily better but are certainly different.
Take for instance the different attitude towards the family. A working-class family hangs together as a middle-class
one does, but the relationship is far less tyrannical. A working man has not that deadly weight of family prestige
hanging round his neck like a millstone. I have pointed out earlier that a middle-class person goes utterly to pieces
under the influence of poverty; and this is generally due to the behaviour of his family — to the fact that he has
scores of relations nagging and badgering him night and day for failing to ‘get on’. The fact that the working class
know how to combine and the middle class don’t is probably due to their different conceptions of family loyalty. You
cannot have an effective trade union of middle-class workers, be-cause in times of strikes almost every middle-class
wife would be egging her husband on to blackleg and get the other fellow’s job. Another working-class characteristic,
disconcerting at first, is their plain-spokenness towards anyone they regard as an equal. If you offer a working man
something he doesn’t want, he tells you that he doesn’t want it; a middle-class person would accept it to avoid giving
offence. And again, take the working-class attitude towards ‘education’. How different it is from ours, and how
immensely sounder! Working people often have a vague reverence for learning in others, but where ‘education’ touches
their own lives they see through it and reject it by a healthy instinct. The time was when I used to lament over quite
imaginary pictures of lads of fourteen dragged protesting from their lessons and set to work at dismal jobs. It seemed
to me dreadful that the doom of a ‘job’ should descend upon anyone at fourteen. Of course I know now that there is not
one working-class boy in a thousand who does not pine for the day when he will leave school. He wants to be doing real
work, not wasting his time on ridiculous rubbish like history and geography. To the working class, the notion of
staying at school till you are nearly grown-up seems merely contemptible and unmanly. The idea of a great big boy of
eighteen, who ought to be bringing a pound a week home to his parents, going to school in a ridiculous uniform and even
being caned for not doing his lessons! Just fancy a working-class boy of eighteen allowing himself to be caned! He is a
man when the other is still a baby. Ernest Pontifex, in Samuel Butler’s Way of All Flesh, after he had had a few
glimpses of real life, looked back on his public school and university education and found it a ‘sickly, debilitating
debauch’. There is much in middle-class life that looks sickly and debilitating when you see it from a working-class
angle.
In a working-class home — I am not thinking at the moment of the unemployed, but of comparatively prosperous homes —
you breathe a warm, decent, deeply human atmosphere which it is not so easy to find elsewhere. I should say that a
manual worker, if he is in steady work and drawing good wages — an ‘if which gets bigger and bigger — has a better
chance of being happy than an ‘educated’ man. His home life seems to fall more naturally into a sane and comely shape.
I have often been struck by the peculiar easy completeness, the perfect symmetry as it were, of a working-class
interior at its best. Especially on winter evenings after tea, when the fire glows in the open range and dances
mirrored in the steel fender, when Father, in shirt-sleeves, sits in the rocking chair at one side of the fire reading
the racing finals, and Mother sits on the other with her sewing, and the children are happy with a pennorth of mint
humbugs, and the dog lolls roasting himself on the rag mat — it is a good place to be in, provided that you can be not
only in it but sufficiently of it to be taken for granted.
This scene is still reduplicated in a majority of English homes, though not in so many as before the war. Its
happiness depends mainly upon one question — whether Father is in work. But notice that the picture I have called up,
of a working-class family sitting round the coal fire after kippers and strong tea, belongs only to our own moment of
time and could not belong either to the future or the past. Skip forward two hundred years into the Utopian future, and
the scene is totally different. Hardly one of the things I have imagined will still be there. In that age when there is
no manual labour and everyone is ‘educated’, it is hardly likely that Father will still be a rough man with enlarged
hands who likes to sit in shirt-sleeves and says ‘Ah wur coomin’ oop street’. And there won’t be a coal fire in the
grate, only some kind of invisible heater. The furniture will be made of rubber, glass, and steel. If there are still
such things as evening papers there will certainly be no racing news in them, for gambling will be meaningless in a
world where there is no poverty and the horse will have vanished from the face of the earth. Dogs, too, will have been
sup-pressed on grounds of hygiene. And there won’t be so many children, either, if the birth-controllers have their
way. But move backwards into the Middle Ages and you are in a world almost equally foreign. A windowless hut, a wood
fire which smokes in your face because there is no chimney, mouldy bread, ‘Poor John’, lice, scurvy, a yearly
child-birth and a yearly child-death, and the priest terrifying you with tales of Hell.
Curiously enough it is not the triumphs of modem engineering, nor the radio, nor the cinematograph, nor the five
thousand novels which are published yearly, nor the crowds at Ascot and the Eton and Harrow match, but the memory of
working-class interiors — especially as I sometimes saw them in my childhood before the war, when England was still
prosperous — that reminds me that our age has not been altogether a bad one to live in.
