Some months ago I cut out of a shiny magazine some paragraphs written by a female journalist and
describing the pleasure resort of the future. She had recently been spending some time at Honolulu, where the rigours
of war do not seem to have been very noticeable. However, “a transport pilot. . .told me that with all the
inventiveness packed into this war, it was a pity someone hadn’t found out how a tired and lifehungry man could relax,
rest, play poker, drink, and make love, all at once, and round the clock, and come out of it feeling good and fresh and
ready for the job again.” This reminded her of an entrepreneur she had met recently who was planning a “pleasure spot
which he thinks will catch on tomorrow as dog racing and dance halls did yesterday.” The entrepreneur’s dream is
described in some detail:
His blue-prints pictured a space covering several acres, under a series of sliding roofs — for the British weather
is unreliableand with a central space spread over with an immense dance floor made of translucent plastic which can be
illuminated from beneath. Around it are grouped other functional spaces, at different levels. Balcony bars and
restaurants commanding high views of the city roofs, and ground-level replicas. A battery of skittle alleys. Two blue
lagoons: one, periodically agitated by waves, for strong swimmers, and another, a smooth and summery pool, for playtime
bathers. Sunlight lamps over the pools to simulate high summer on days when the roofs don’t slide back to disclose a
hot sun in a cloudless sky. Rows of bunks on which people wearing sun-glasses and slips can lie and start a tan or
deepen an existing one under a sunray lamp.
Music seeping through hundreds of grills connected with a central distributing stage, where dance or symphonic
orchestras play or the radio programme can be caught, amplified, and disseminated. Outside, two 1,000-car parks. One,
free. The other, an open-air cinema drive-in, cars queueing to move through turnstiles, and the film thrown on a giant
screen facing a row of assembled cars. Uniformed male attendants check the cars, provide free aid and water, sell
petrol and oil. Girls in white satin slacks take orders for buffet dishes and drinks, and bring them on trays.
Whenever one hears such phrases as “pleasure spot”, “pleasure resort”, “pleasure city”, it is difficult not to
remember the oftenquoted opening of Coleridge’s “Kubla Khan”.
In Xanadu did Kubla Khan
A stately pleasure-dome decree:
Where Alph, the sacred river, ran
Through caverns measureless to man
Down to a sunless sea.
So twice five miles of fertile ground
With walls and towers were girdled round:
And there were gardens bright with sinuous rills
Where blossomed many an incense-bearing tree;
And here were forests ancient as the hills,
Enfolding sunny spots of greenery.
But it will be seen that Coleridge has got it all wrong. He strikes a false note straight off with that talk about
“sacred” rivers and “measureless” caverns. In the hands of the above-mentioned entrepreneur, Kubla Khan’s project would
have become something quite different. The caverns, air-conditioned, discreetly lighted and with their original rocky
interior buried under layers of tastefully-coloured plastics, would be turned into a series of tea-grottoes in the
Moorish, Caucasian or Hawaiian styles. Alph, the sacred river, would be dammed up to make an artificially-warmed
bathing pool, while the sunless sea would be illuminated from below with pink electric lights, and one would cruise
over it in real Venetian gondolas each equipped with its own radio set. The forests and “spots of greenery” referred to
by Coleridge would be cleaned up to make way for glass-covered tennis courts, a bandstand, a roller-skating rink and
perhaps a ninehole golf course. In short, there would be everything that a “lifehungry” man could desire.
I have no doubt that, all over the world, hundreds of pleasure resorts similar to the one described above are now
being planned, and perhaps are even being built. It is unlikely that they will be finished — world events will see to
that — but they represent faithfully enough the modern civilised man’s idea of pleasure. Something of the kind is
already partially attained in the more magnificent dance halls, movie palaces, hotels, restaurants and luxury liners.
On a pleasure cruise or in a Lyons Corner House one already gets something more than a glimpse of this future paradise.
Analysed, its main characteristics are these:
The music — and if possible it should be the same music for everybody — is the most important ingredient. Its
function is to prevent thought and conversation, and to shut out any natural sound, such as the song of birds or the
whistling of the wind, that might otherwise intrude. The radio is already consciously used for this purpose by
innumerable people. In very many English homes the radio is literally never turned off, though it is manipulated from
time to time so as to make sure that only light music will come out of it. I know people who will keep the radio
playing all through a meal and at the same time continue talking just loudly enough for the voices and the music to
cancel out. This is done with a definite purpose. The music prevents the conversation from becoming serious or even
coherent, while the chatter of voices stops one from listening attentively to the music and thus prevents the onset of
that dreaded thing, thought. For
The lights must never go out.
The music must always play,
Lest we should see where we are;
Lost in a haunted wood,
Children afraid of the dark
Who have never been happy or good.
It is difficult not to feel that the unconscious aim in the most typical modern pleasure resorts is a return to the
womb. For there, too, one was never alone, one never saw daylight, the temperature was always regulated, one did not
have to worry about work or food, and one’s thoughts, if any, were drowned by a continuous rhythmic throbbing.
When one looks at Coleridge’s very different conception of a “pleasure dome”, one sees that it revolves partly round
gardens and partly round caverns, rivers, forests and mountains with “deep romantic chasms” — in short, round what is
called Nature. But the whole notion of admiring Nature, and feeling a sort of religious awe in the presence of
glaciers, deserts or waterfalls, is bound up with the sense of man’s littleness and weakness against the power of the
universe. The moon is beautiful partly because we cannot reach it, (lie sea is impressive because one can never be sure
of crossing it safely. Even the pleasure one takes in a flower — and this is true even of a botanist who knows all
there is to be known about the floweris dependent partly on the sense of mystery. But meanwhile man’s power over Nature
is steadily increasing. With the aid of the atomic bomb we could literally move mountains: we could even, so it is
said, alter the climate of the earth by melting the polar ice-caps and irrigating the Sahara. Isn’t there, therefore,
something sentimental and obscurantist in preferring bird-song to swing music and in wanting to leave a few patches of
wildness here and there instead of covering the whole surface of the earth with a network of Autobahnen flooded by
artificial sunlight?
The question only arises because in exploring the physical universe man has made no attempt to explore himself. Much
of what goes by the name of pleasure is simply an effort to destroy consciousness. If one started by asking, what is
man? what are his needs? how can he best express himself? one would discover that merely having the power to avoid work
and live one’s life from birth to death in electric light and to the tune of tinned music is not a reason for doing so.
Man needs warmth, society, leisure, comfort and security: he also needs solitude, creative work and the sense of
wonder. If he recognised this he could use the products of science and industrialism eclectically, applying always the
same test: does this make me more human or less human? He would then learn that the highest happiness does not lie in
relaxing, resting, playing poker, drinking and making love simultaneously. And the instinctive horror which all
sensitive people feel at the progressive mechanisation of life would be seen not to be a mere sentimental archaism, but
to be fully justified. For man only stays human by preserving large patches of simplicity in his life, while the
tendency of many modern inventions — in particular the film, the radio and the aeroplane — is to weaken his
consciousness, dull his curiosity, and, in general, drive him nearer to the animals.
