About a year ago I and a number of others were engaged in broadcasting literary programmes to India,
and among other things we broadcast a good deal of verse by contemporary and near-contemporary English writers — for
example, Eliot, Herbert Read, Auden, Spender, Dylan Thomas, Henry Treece, Alex Comfort, Robert Bridges, Edmund Blunden,
D.H. Lawrence. Whenever it was possible we had poems broadcast by the people who wrote them. Just why these particular
programmes (a small and remote out-flanking movement in the radio war) were instituted there is no need to explain
here, but I should add that the fact that we were broadcasting to an Indian audience dictated our technique to some
extent. The essential point was that our literary broadcasts were aimed at the Indian university students, a small and
hostile audience, unapproachable by anything that could be described as British propaganda. It was known in advance
that we could not hope for more than a few thousand listeners at the most, and this gave us an excuse to be more
“highbrow” than is generally possible on the air.
If you are broadcasting poetry to people who know your language but don’t share your cultural background, a certain
amount of comment and explanation is unavoidable, and the formula we usually followed was to broadcast what purported
to be a monthly literary magazine. The editorial staff were supposedly sitting in their office, discussing what to put
into the next number. Somebody suggested one poem, someone else suggested another, there was a short discussion and
then came the poem itself, read in a different voice, preferably the author’s own. This poem naturally called up
another, and so the programme continued, usually with at least half a minute of discussion between any two items. For a
half-hour programme, six voices seemed to be the best number. A programme of this sort was necessarily somewhat
shapeless, but it could be given a certain appearance of unity by making it revolve round a single central theme. For
example, one number of our imaginary magazine was devoted to the subject of war. It included two poems by Edmund
Blunden, Auden’s “September 1941 “, extracts from a long poem by G.S. Fraser (“A Letter to Anne Ridler”), Byron’s
“Isles of Greece” and an extract from T.E. Lawrence’s REVOLT IN THE DESERT. These half-dozen items, with the arguments
that preceded and followed them, covered reasonably well the possible attitudes towards war. The poems and the prose
extract took about twenty minutes to broadcast, the arguments about eight minutes.
This formula may seem slightly ridiculous and also rather patronising, but its advantage is that the element of mere
instruction, the textbook motif, which is quite unavoidable if one is going to broadcast serious and sometimes
“difficult” verse, becomes a lot less forbidding when it appears as an informal discussion. The various speakers can
ostensibly say to one another what they are in reality saying to the audience. Also, by such an approach you at least
give a poem a context, which is just what poetry lacks from the average man’s point of view. But of course there are
other methods. One which we frequently used was to set a poem in music. It is announced that in a few minutes’ time
such and such a poem will be broadcast; then the music plays for perhaps a minute, then fades out into the poem, which
follows without any title or announcement, then the music is faded again and plays up for another minute or two — the
whole thing taking perhaps five minutes. It is necessary to choose appropriate music, but needless to say, the real
purpose of the music is to insulate the poem from the rest of the programme. By this method you can have, say, a
Shakespeare sonnet within three minutes of a news bulletin without, at any rate to my ear, any gross incongruity.
These programmes that I have been speaking of were of no great value in themselves, but I have mentioned them
because of the ideas they aroused in myself and some others about the possibilities of the radio as a means of
popularising poetry. I was early struck by the fact that the broadcasting of a poem by the person who wrote it does not
merely produce an effect upon the audience, if any, but also on the poet himself. One must remember that extremely
little in the way of broadcasting poetry has been done in England, and that many people who write verse have never even
considered the idea of reading it aloud. By being set down at a microphone, especially if this happens at all
regularly, the poet is brought into a new relationship with his work, not otherwise attainable in our time and country.
It is a commonplace that in modern times — the last two hundred years, say — poetry has come to have less and less
connection either with music or with the spoken word. It needs print in order to exist at all, and it is no more
expected that a poet, as such, will know how to sing or even to declaim than it is expected that an architect will know
how to plaster a ceiling. Lyrical and rhetorical poetry have almost ceased to be written, and a hostility towards
poetry on the part of the common man has come to be taken for granted in any country where everyone can read. And where
such a breach exists it is always inclined to widen, because the concept of poetry as primarily something printed, and
something intelligible only to a minority, encourages obscurity and “cleverness”. How many people do not feel
quasi-instinctively that there must be something wrong with any poem whose meaning can be taken in at a single glance?
It seems unlikely that these tendencies will be checked unless it again becomes normal to read verse aloud, and it is
difficult to see how this can be brought about except by using the radio as a medium. But the special advantage of the
radio, its power to select the right audience, and to do away with stage-fright and embarrassment, ought here to be
noticed.
In broadcasting your audience is conjectural, but it is an audience of ONE. Millions may be listening, but each is
listening alone, or as a member of a small group, and each has (or ought to have) the feeling that you are speaking to
him individually. More than this, it is reasonable to assume that your audience is sympathetic, or at least interested,
for anyone who is bored can promptly switch you off by turning a knob. But though presumably sympathetic, the audience
HAS NO POWER OVER YOU. It is just here that a broadcast differs from a speech or a lecture. On the platform, as anyone
used to public speaking knows, it is almost impossible not to take your tone from the audience. It is always obvious
within a few minutes what they will respond to and what they will not, and in practice you are almost compelled to
speak for the benefit of what you estimate as the stupidest person present, and also to ingratiate yourself by means of
the ballyhoo known as “personality”. If you don’t do so, the result is always an atmosphere of frigid embarrassment.
That grisly thing, a “poetry reading”, is what it is because there will always be some among the audience who are bored
or all but frankly hostile and who can’t remove themselves by the simple act of turning a knob. And it is at bottom the
same difficulty — the fact that a theatre audience is not a selected one — that makes it impossible to get a decent
performance of Shakespeare in England. On the air these conditions do not exist. The poet FEELS that he is addressing
people to whom poetry means something, and it is a fact that poets who are used to broadcasting can read into the
microphone with a virtuosity they would not equal if they had a visible audience in front of them. The element of
make-believe that enters here does not greatly matter. The point is that in the only way now possible the poet has been
brought into a situation in which reading verse aloud seems a natural unembarrassing thing, a normal exchange between
man and man: also he has been led to think of his work as SOUND rather than as a pattern on paper. By that much the
reconciliation between poetry and the common man is nearer. It already exists at the poet’s end of the aether-waves,
whatever may be happening at the other end.
However, what is happening at the other end cannot be disregarded. It will be seen that I have been speaking as
though the whole subject of poetry were embarrassing, almost indecent, as though popularising poetry were essentially a
strategic manoeuvre, like getting a dose of medicine down a child’s throat or establishing tolerance for a persecuted
sect. But unfortunately that or something like it is the case. There can be no doubt that in our civilisation poetry is
by far the most discredited of the arts, the only art, indeed, in which the average man refuses to discern any value.
Arnold Bennett was hardly exaggerating when he said that in the English-speaking countries the word “poetry” would
disperse a crowd quicker than a fire-hose. And as I have pointed out, a breach of this kind tends to widen simply
because of its existence, the common man becoming more and more anti-poetry, the poet more and more arrogant and
unintelligible, until the divorce between poetry and popular culture is accepted as a sort of law of nature, although
in fact it belongs only to our own time and to a comparatively small area of the earth. We live in an age in which the
average human being in the highly civilised countries is aesthetically inferior to the lowest savage. This state of
affairs is generally looked upon as being incurable by any CONSCIOUS act, and on the other hand is expected to right
itself of its own accord as soon as society takes a comelier shape. With slight variations the Marxist, the Anarchist
and the religious believer will all tell you this, and in broad terms it is undoubtedly true. The ugliness amid which
we live has spiritual and economic causes and is not to be explained by the mere going-astray of tradition at some
point or other. But it does not follow that no improvement is possible within our present framework, nor that an
aesthetic improvement is not a necessary part of the general redemption of society. It is worth stopping to wonder,
therefore, whether it would not be possible even now to rescue poetry from its special position as the most hated of
the arts and win for it at least the same degree of toleration as exists for music. But one has to start by asking, in
what way and to what extent is poetry unpopular?
On the face of it, the unpopularity of poetry is as complete as it could be. But on second thoughts, this has to be
qualified in a rather peculiar way. To begin with, there is still an appreciable amount of folk poetry (nursery rhymes
etc) which is universally known and quoted and forms part of the background of everyone’s mind. There is also a handful
of ancient songs and ballads which have never gone out of favour. In addition there is the popularity, or at least the
toleration, of “good bad” poetry, generally of a patriotic or sentimental kind. This might seem beside the point if it
were not that “good bad” poetry has all the characteristics which, ostensibly, make the average man dislike true
poetry. It is in verse, it rhymes, it deals in lofty sentiments and unusual language — all this to a very marked
degree, for it is almost axiomatic that bad poetry is more “poetical” than good poetry. Yet if not actively liked it is
at least tolerated. For example, just before writing this I have been listening to a couple of BBC comedians doing
their usual turn before the 9 o’clock news. In the last three minutes one of the two comedians suddenly announces that
he “wants to be serious for a moment” and proceeds to recite a piece of patriotic balderdash entitled “A Fine Old
English Gentleman”, in praise of His Majesty the King. Now, what is the reaction of the audience to this sudden lapse
into the worst sort of rhyming heroics? It cannot be very violently negative, or there would be a sufficient volume of
indignant letters to stop the BBC doing this kind of thing. One must conclude that though the big public is hostile to
POETRY, it is not strongly hostile to VERSE. After all, if rhyme and metre were disliked for their own sakes, neither
songs nor dirty limericks could be popular. Poetry is disliked because it is associated with untelligibility,
intellectual pretentiousness and a general feeling of Sunday-on-a-weekday. Its name creates in advance the same sort of
bad impression as the word “God”, or a parson’s dog-collar. To a certain extent, popularising poetry is a question of
breaking down an acquired inhibition. It is a question of getting people to listen instead of uttering a mechanical
raspberry. If true poetry could be introduced to the big public in such a way as to make it seem NORMAL, as that piece
of rubbish I have just listened to presumably seemed normal, then part of the prejudice against it might be
overcome.
It is difficult to believe that poetry can ever be popularised again without some deliberate effort at the education
of public taste, involving strategy and perhaps even subterfuge. T.S. Eliot once suggested that poetry, particularly
dramatic poetry, might be brought back into the consciousness of ordinary people through the medium of the music hall;
he might have added the pantomime, whose vast possibilities do not seem ever to have been completely explored. “Sweeney
Agonistes” was perhaps written with some such idea in mind, and it would in fact be conceivable as a music-hall turn,
or at least as a scene in a revue. I have suggested the radio as a more hopeful medium, and I have pointed out its
technical advantages, particularly from the point of view of the poet. The reason why such a suggestion sounds hopeless
at first hearing is that few people are able to imagine the radio being used for the dissemination of anything except
tripe. People listen to the stuff that does actually dribble from the loud-speakers of the world, and conclude that it
is for that and nothing else that the wireless exists. Indeed the very word “wireless” calls up a picture either of
roaring dictators or of genteel throaty voices announcing that three of our aircraft have failed to return. Poetry on
the air sounds like the Muses in striped trousers. Nevertheless one ought not to confuse the capabilities of an
instrument with the use it is actually put to. Broadcasting is what it is, not because there is something inherently
vulgar, silly and dishonest about the whole apparatus of microphone and transmitter, but because all the broadcasting
that now happens all over the world is under the control of governments or great monopoly companies which are actively
interested in maintaining the STATUS QUO and therefore in preventing the common man from becoming too intelligent.
Something of the same kind has happened to the cinema, which, like the radio, made its appearance during the monopoly
stage of capitalism and is fantastically expensive to operate. In all the arts the tendency is similar. More and more
the channels of production are under the control of bureaucrats, whose aim is to destroy the artist or at least to
castrate him. This would be a bleak outlook if it were not that the totalitarianisation which is now going on, and must
undoubtedly continue to go on, in every country of the world, is mitigated by another process which it was not easy to
foresee even as short a time as five years ago.
This is, that the huge bureaucratic machines of which we are all part are beginning to work creakily because of
their mere size and their constant growth. The tendency of the modern state is to wipe out the freedom of the
intellect, and yet at the same time every state, especially under the pressure of war, finds itself more and more in
need of an intelligentsia to do its publicity for it. The modern state needs, for example, pamphlet-writers, poster
artists, illustrators, broadcasters, lecturers, film producers, actors, song composers, even painters and sculptors,
not to mention psychologists, sociologists, bio-chemists, mathematicians and what not. The British Government started
the present war with the more or less openly declared intention of keeping the literary intelligentsia out of it; yet
after three years of war almost every writer, however undesirable his political history or opinions, has been sucked
into the various Ministries or the BBC and even those who enter the armed forces tend to find themselves after a while
in Public Relations or some other essentially literary job. The Government has absorbed these people, unwillingly
enough, because it found itself unable to get on without them. The ideal, from the official point of view, would have
been to put all publicity into the hands of “safe” people like A.P. Herbert or Ian Hay: but since not enough of these
were available, the existing intelligentsia had to be utilised, and the tone and even to some extent the content of
official propaganda have been modified accordingly. No one acquainted with the Government pamphlets, ABCA (The Army
Bureau of Current Affairs.) lectures, documentary films and broadcasts to occupied countries which have been issued
during the past two years imagines that our rulers would sponsor this kind of thing if they could help it. Only, the
bigger the machine of government becomes, the more loose ends and forgotten corners there are in it. This is perhaps a
small consolation, but it is not a despicable one. It means that in countries where there is already a strong liberal
tradition, bureaucratic tyranny can perhaps never be complete. The striped-trousered ones will rule, but so long as
they are forced to maintain an intelligentsia, the intelligentsia will have a certain amount of autonomy. If the
Government needs, for example, documentary films, it must employ people specially interested in the technique of the
film, and it must allow them the necessary minimum of freedom; consequently, films that are all wrong from the
bureaucratic point of view will always have a tendency to appear. So also with painting, photography, scriptwriting,
reportage, lecturing and all the other arts and half-arts of which a complex modern state has need.
The application of this to the radio is obvious. At present the loudspeaker is the enemy of the creative writer, but
this may not necessarily remain true when the volume and scope of broadcasting increase. As things are, although the
BBC does keep up a feeble show of interest in contemporary literature, it is harder to capture five minutes on the air
in which to broadcast a poem than twelve hours in which to disseminate lying propaganda, tinned music, stale jokes,
faked “discussions” or what-have-you. But that state of affairs may alter in the way I have indicated, and when that
time comes serious experiment in the broadcasting of verse, with complete disregard for the various hostile influences
which prevent any such thing at present, would become possible. I don’t claim it as certain that such an experiment
would have very great results. The radio was bureaucratised so early in its career that the relationship between
broadcasting and literature has never been thought out. It is not certain that the microphone is the instrument by
which poetry could be brought back to the common people and it is not even certain that poetry would gain by being more
of a spoken and less of a written thing. But I do urge that these possibilities exist, and that those who care for
literature might turn their minds more often to this much-despised medium, whose powers for good have perhaps been
obscured by the voices of Professor Joad and Doctor Goebbels.
