Saints should always be judged guilty until they are proved innocent, but the tests that have to be
applied to them are not, of course, the same in all cases. In Gandhi’s case the questions on feels inclined to ask are:
to what extent was Gandhi moved by vanity — by the consciousness of himself as a humble, naked old man, sitting on a
praying mat and shaking empires by sheer spiritual power — and to what extent did he compromise his own principles by
entering politics, which of their nature are inseparable from coercion and fraud? To give a definite answer one would
have to study Gandhi’s acts and writings in immense detail, for his whole life was a sort of pilgrimage in which every
act was significant. But this partial autobiography, which ends in the nineteen-twenties, is strong evidence in his
favor, all the more because it covers what he would have called the unregenerate part of his life and reminds one that
inside the saint, or near-saint, there was a very shrewd, able person who could, if he had chosen, have been a
brilliant success as a lawyer, an administrator or perhaps even a businessman.
At about the time when the autobiography first appeared I remember reading its opening chapters in the ill-printed
pages of some Indian newspaper. They made a good impression on me, which Gandhi himself at that time did not. The
things that one associated with him — home-spun cloth, “soul forces” and vegetarianism — were unappealing, and his
medievalist program was obviously not viable in a backward, starving, over-populated country. It was also apparent that
the British were making use of him, or thought they were making use of him. Strictly speaking, as a Nationalist, he was
an enemy, but since in every crisis he would exert himself to prevent violence — which, from the British point of view,
meant preventing any effective action whatever — he could be regarded as “our man”. In private this was sometimes
cynically admitted. The attitude of the Indian millionaires was similar. Gandhi called upon them to repent, and
naturally they preferred him to the Socialists and Communists who, given the chance, would actually have taken their
money away. How reliable such calculations are in the long run is doubtful; as Gandhi himself says, “in the end
deceivers deceive only themselves”; but at any rate the gentleness with which he was nearly always handled was due
partly to the feeling that he was useful. The British Conservatives only became really angry with him when, as in 1942,
he was in effect turning his non-violence against a different conqueror.
But I could see even then that the British officials who spoke of him with a mixture of amusement and disapproval
also genuinely liked and admired him, after a fashion. Nobody ever suggested that he was corrupt, or ambitious in any
vulgar way, or that anything he did was actuated by fear or malice. In judging a man like Gandhi one seems
instinctively to apply high standards, so that some of his virtues have passed almost unnoticed. For instance, it is
clear even from the autobiography that his natural physical courage was quite outstanding: the manner of his death was
a later illustration of this, for a public man who attached any value to his own skin would have been more adequately
guarded. Again, he seems to have been quite free from that maniacal suspiciousness which, as E.M. Forster rightly says
in A PASSAGE TO INDIA, is the besetting Indian vice, as hypocrisy is the British vice. Although no doubt he was shrewd
enough in detecting dishonesty, he seems wherever possible to have believed that other people were acting in good faith
and had a better nature through which they could be approached. And though he came of a poor middle-class family,
started life rather unfavorably, and was probably of unimpressive physical appearance, he was not afflicted by envy or
by the feeling of inferiority. Color feeling when he first met it in its worst form in South Africa, seems rather to
have astonished him. Even when he was fighting what was in effect a color war, he did not think of people in terms of
race or status. The governor of a province, a cotton millionaire, a half-starved Dravidian coolie, a British private
soldier were all equally human beings, to be approached in much the same way. It is noticeable that even in the worst
possible circumstances, as in South Africa when he was making himself unpopular as the champion of the Indian
community, he did not lack European friends.
Written in short lengths for newspaper serialization, the autobiography is not a literary masterpiece, but it is the
more impressive because of the commonplaceness of much of its material. It is well to be reminded that Gandhi started
out with the normal ambitions of a young Indian student and only adopted his extremist opinions by degrees and, in some
cases, rather unwillingly. There was a time, it is interesting to learn, when he wore a top hat, took dancing lessons,
studied French and Latin, went up the Eiffel Tower and even tried to learn the violin — all this was the idea of
assimilating European civilization as throughly as possible. He was not one of those saints who are marked out by their
phenomenal piety from childhood onwards, nor one of the other kind who forsake the world after sensational
debaucheries. He makes full confession of the misdeeds of his youth, but in fact there is not much to confess. As a
frontispiece to the book there is a photograph of Gandhi’s possessions at the time of his death. The whole outfit could
be purchased for about 5 pounds, and Gandhi’s sins, at least his fleshly sins, would make the same sort of appearance
if placed all in one heap. A few cigarettes, a few mouthfuls of meat, a few annas pilfered in childhood from the
maidservant, two visits to a brothel (on each occasion he got away without “doing anything”), one narrowly escaped
lapse with his landlady in Plymouth, one outburst of temper — that is about the whole collection. Almost from childhood
onwards he had a deep earnestness, an attitude ethical rather than religious, but, until he was about thirty, no very
definite sense of direction. His first entry into anything describable as public life was made by way of vegetarianism.
Underneath his less ordinary qualities one feels all the time the solid middle-class businessmen who were his
ancestors. One feels that even after he had abandoned personal ambition he must have been a resourceful, energetic
lawyer and a hard-headed political organizer, careful in keeping down expenses, an adroit handler of committees and an
indefatigable chaser of subscriptions. His character was an extraordinarily mixed one, but there was almost nothing in
it that you can put your finger on and call bad, and I believe that even Gandhi’s worst enemies would admit that he was
an interesting and unusual man who enriched the world simply by being alive. Whether he was also a lovable man, and
whether his teachings can have much for those who do not accept the religious beliefs on which they are founded, I have
never felt fully certain.
Of late years it has been the fashion to talk about Gandhi as though he were not only sympathetic to the Western
Left-wing movement, but were integrally part of it. Anarchists and pacifists, in particular, have claimed him for their
own, noticing only that he was opposed to centralism and State violence and ignoring the other-worldly, anti-humanist
tendency of his doctrines. But one should, I think, realize that Gandhi’s teachings cannot be squared with the belief
that Man is the measure of all things and that our job is to make life worth living on this earth, which is the only
earth we have. They make sense only on the assumption that God exists and that the world of solid objects is an
illusion to be escaped from. It is worth considering the disciplines which Gandhi imposed on himself and which — though
he might not insist on every one of his followers observing every detail — he considered indispensable if one wanted to
serve either God or humanity. First of all, no meat-eating, and if possible no animal food in any form. (Gandhi
himself, for the sake of his health, had to compromise on milk, but seems to have felt this to be a backsliding.) No
alcohol or tobacco, and no spices or condiments even of a vegetable kind, since food should be taken not for its own
sake but solely in order to preserve one’s strength. Secondly, if possible, no sexual intercourse. If sexual
intercourse must happen, then it should be for the sole purpose of begetting children and presumably at long intervals.
Gandhi himself, in his middle thirties, took the vow of BRAMAHCHARYA, which means not only complete chastity but the
elimination of sexual desire. This condition, it seems, is difficult to attain without a special diet and frequent
fasting. One of the dangers of milk-drinking is that it is apt to arouse sexual desire. And finally - this is the
cardinal point — for the seeker after goodness there must be no close friendships and no exclusive loves whatever.
Close friendships, Gandhi says, are dangerous, because “friends react on one another” and through loyalty to a
friend one can be led into wrong-doing. This is unquestionably true. Moreover, if one is to love God, or to love
humanity as a whole, one cannot give one’s preference to any individual person. This again is true, and it marks the
point at which the humanistic and the religious attitude cease to be reconcilable. To an ordinary human being, love
means nothing if it does not mean loving some people more than others. The autobiography leaves it uncertain whether
Gandhi behaved in an inconsiderate way to his wife and children, but at any rate it makes clear that on three occasions
he was willing to let his wife or a child die rather than administer the animal food prescribed by the doctor. It is
true that the threatened death never actually occurred, and also that Gandhi — with, one gathers, a good deal of moral
pressure in the opposite direction — always gave the patient the choice of staying alive at the price of committing a
sin: still, if the decision had been solely his own, he would have forbidden the animal food, whatever the risks might
be. There must, he says, be some limit to what we will do in order to remain alive, and the limit is well on this side
of chicken broth. This attitude is perhaps a noble one, but, in the sense which — I think — most people would give to
the word, it is inhuman. The essence of being human is that one does not seek perfection, that one is sometimes willing
to commit sins for the sake of loyalty, that one does not push asceticism to the point where it makes friendly
intercourse impossible, and that one is prepared in the end to be defeated and broken up by life, which is the
inevitable price of fastening one’s love upon other human individuals. No doubt alcohol, tobacco, and so forth, are
things that a saint must avoid, but sainthood is also a thing that human beings must avoid. There is an obvious retort
to this, but one should be wary about making it. In this yogi-ridden age, it is too readily assumed that
“non-attachment” is not only better than a full acceptance of earthly life, but that the ordinary man only rejects it
because it is too difficult: in other words, that the average human being is a failed saint. It is doubtful whether
this is true. Many people genuinely do not wish to be saints, and it is probable that some who achieve or aspire to
sainthood have never felt much temptation to be human beings. If one could follow it to its psychological roots, one
would, I believe, find that the main motive for “non-attachment” is a desire to escape from the pain of living, and
above all from love, which, sexual or non-sexual, is hard work. But it is not necessary here to argue whether the
other-worldly or the humanistic ideal is “higher”. The point is that they are incompatible. One must choose between God
and Man, and all “radicals” and “progressives”, from the mildest Liberal to the most extreme Anarchist, have in effect
chosen Man.
However, Gandhi’s pacifism can be separated to some extent from his other teachings. Its motive was religious, but
he claimed also for it that it was a definitive technique, a method, capable of producing desired political results.
Gandhi’s attitude was not that of most Western pacifists. SATYAGRAHA, first evolved in South Africa, was a sort of
non-violent warfare, a way of defeating the enemy without hurting him and without feeling or arousing hatred. It
entailed such things as civil disobedience, strikes, lying down in front of railway trains, enduring police charges
without running away and without hitting back, and the like. Gandhi objected to “passive resistance” as a translation
of SATYAGRAHA: in Gujarati, it seems, the word means “firmness in the truth”. In his early days Gandhi served as a
stretcher-bearer on the British side in the Boer War, and he was prepared to do the same again in the war of 1914-18.
Even after he had completely abjured violence he was honest enough to see that in war it is usually necessary to take
sides. He did not — indeed, since his whole political life centred round a struggle for national independence, he could
not — take the sterile and dishonest line of pretending that in every war both sides are exactly the same and it makes
no difference who wins. Nor did he, like most Western pacifists, specialize in avoiding awkward questions. In relation
to the late war, one question that every pacifist had a clear obligation to answer was: “What about the Jews? Are you
prepared to see them exterminated? If not, how do you propose to save them without resorting to war?” I must say that I
have never heard, from any Western pacifist, an honest answer to this question, though I have heard plenty of evasions,
usually of the “you’re another” type. But it so happens that Gandhi was asked a somewhat similar question in 1938 and
that his answer is on record in Mr. Louis Fischer’s GANDHI AND STALIN. According to Mr. Fischer, Gandhi’s view was that
the German Jews ought to commit collective suicide, which “would have aroused the world and the people of Germany to
Hitler’s violence.” After the war he justified himself: the Jews had been killed anyway, and might as well have died
significantly. One has the impression that this attitude staggered even so warm an admirer as Mr. Fischer, but Gandhi
was merely being honest. If you are not prepared to take life, you must often be prepared for lives to be lost in some
other way. When, in 1942, he urged non-violent resistance against a Japanese invasion, he was ready to admit that it
might cost several million deaths.
At the same time there is reason to think that Gandhi, who after all was born in 1869, did not understand the nature
of totalitarianism and saw everything in terms of his own struggle against the British government. The important point
here is not so much that the British treated him forbearingly as that he was always able to command publicity. As can
be seen from the phrase quoted above, he believed in “arousing the world”, which is only possible if the world gets a
chance to hear what you are doing. It is difficult to see how Gandhi’s methods could be applied in a country where
opponents of the régime disappear in the middle of the night and are never heard of again. Without a free press and the
right of assembly, it is impossible not merely to appeal to outside opinion, but to bring a mass movement into being,
or even to make your intentions known to your adversary. Is there a Gandhi in Russia at this moment? And if there is,
what is he accomplishing? The Russian masses could only practise civil disobedience if the same idea happened to occur
to all of them simultaneously, and even then, to judge by the history of the Ukraine famine, it would make no
difference. But let it be granted that non-violent resistance can be effective against one’s own government, or against
an occupying power: even so, how does one put it into practise internationally? Gandhi’s various conflicting statements
on the late war seem to show that he felt the difficulty of this. Applied to foreign politics, pacifism either stops
being pacifist or becomes appeasement. Moreover the assumption, which served Gandhi so well in dealing with
individuals, that all human beings are more or less approachable and will respond to a generous gesture, needs to be
seriously questioned. It is not necessarily true, for example, when you are dealing with lunatics. Then the question
becomes: Who is sane? Was Hitler sane? And is it not possible for one whole culture to be insane by the standards of
another? And, so far as one can gauge the feelings of whole nations, is there any apparent connection between a
generous deed and a friendly response? Is gratitude a factor in international politics?
These and kindred questions need discussion, and need it urgently, in the few years left to us before somebody
presses the button and the rockets begin to fly. It seems doubtful whether civilization can stand another major war,
and it is at least thinkable that the way out lies through non-violence. It is Gandhi’s virtue that he would have been
ready to give honest consideration to the kind of question that I have raised above; and, indeed, he probably did
discuss most of these questions somewhere or other in his innumerable newspaper articles. One feels of him that there
was much he did not understand, but not that there was anything that he was frightened of saying or thinking. I have
never been able to feel much liking for Gandhi, but I do not feel sure that as a political thinker he was wrong in the
main, nor do I believe that his life was a failure. It is curious that when he was assassinated, many of his warmest
admirers exclaimed sorrowfully that he had lived just long enough to see his life work in ruins, because India was
engaged in a civil war which had always been foreseen as one of the byproducts of the transfer of power. But it was not
in trying to smooth down Hindu-Moslem rivalry that Gandhi had spent his life. His main political objective, the
peaceful ending of British rule, had after all been attained. As usual the relevant facts cut across one another. On
the other hand, the British did get out of India without fighting, and event which very few observers indeed would have
predicted until about a year before it happened. On the other hand, this was done by a Labour government, and it is
certain that a Conservative government, especially a government headed by Churchill, would have acted differently. But
if, by 1945, there had grown up in Britain a large body of opinion sympathetic to Indian independence, how far was this
due to Gandhi’s personal influence? And if, as may happen, India and Britain finally settle down into a decent and
friendly relationship, will this be partly because Gandhi, by keeping up his struggle obstinately and without hatred,
disinfected the political air? That one even thinks of asking such questions indicates his stature. One may feel, as I
do, a sort of aesthetic distaste for Gandhi, one may reject the claims of sainthood made on his behalf (he never made
any such claim himself, by the way), one may also reject sainthood as an ideal and therefore feel that Gandhi’s basic
aims were anti-human and reactionary: but regarded simply as a politician, and compared with the other leading
political figures of our time, how clean a smell he has managed to leave behind!
