Soon after I arrived at Crossgates (not immediately, but after a week or two, just when I seemed to
be settling into routine of school life) I began wetting my bed. I was now aged eight, so that this was a reversion to
a habit which I must have grown out of at least four years earlier.
Nowadays, I believe, bed-wetting in such circumstances is taken for granted. It is a normal reaction in children who
have been removed from their homes to a strange place. In those days, however, it was looked on as a disgusting crime
which the child committed on purpose and for which the proper cure was a beating. For my part I did not need to be told
it was a crime. Night after night I prayed, with a fervor never previously attained in my prayers, ‘Please God, do not
let me wet my bed! Oh, please God, do not let me wet my bed!’ but it made remarkably little difference. Some nights the
thing happened, others not. There was no volition about it, no consciousness. You did not properly speaking do the
deed: you were merely woke up in the morning and found that the sheets were wringing wet.
After the second or third offense I was warned that I should be beaten next time, but I received the warning in a
curiously roundabout way. One afternoon, as we were filing out from tea, Mrs. Simpson, the headmaster’s wife, was
sitting at the head of one of the tables, chatting with a lady of whom I know nothing, except that she was on an
afternoon’s visit to the school. She was an intimidating, masculine-looking person wearing a riding habit, or something
that I took to be a riding habit. I was just leaving the room when Mrs. Simpson called me back, as though to introduce
me to the visitor.
Mrs. Simpson was nicknamed Bingo, and I shall call her by that name for I seldom think of her by any other.
(Officially, however, she was addressed as Mum, probably a corruption of the ‘Ma’am’ used by public school boys to
their housemasters’ wives.) She was a stocky square-built woman with hard red cheeks, a flat top to her head, prominent
brows and deepset, suspicious eyes. Although a great deal of the time she was full of false heartiness, jollying one
along with mannish slang (‘Buck up, old chap!’ and so forth), and even using one’s Christian name, her eyes never lost
their anxious, accusing look. It was very difficult to look her in the face without feeling guilty, even at moments
when one was not guilty of anything in particular.
‘Here is a little boy,’ said Bingo, indicating me to the strange lady, ‘who wets his bed every night. Do you know
what I am going to do if you wet your bed again?’ she added, turning to me. ‘I am going to get the Sixth Form to beat
you.’
The strange lady put on an air of being inexpressibly shocked, and exclaimed ‘I-should-think-so!’ And here occurred
one of those wild, almost lunatic misunderstandings which are part of the daily experience of childhood. The Sixth Form
was a group of older boys who were selected as having ‘character’ and were empowered to beat smaller boys. I had not
yet learned of their existence, and I mis-heard the phrase ‘the Sixth Form’ as ‘Mrs. Form.’ I took it as referring to
the strange lady — I thought, that is, that her name was Mrs. Form. It was an improbable name, but a child has no
judgment in such matters. I imagined, therefore, that it was she who was to be deputed to beat me. It did not strike me
as strange that this job should be turned over to a casual visitor in no way connected with the school. I merely
assumed that ‘Mrs. Form’ was a stern disciplinarian who enjoyed beating people (somehow her appearance seemed to bear
this out) and I had an immediate terrifying vision of her arriving for the occasion in full riding kit and armed with a
hunting whip. To this day I can feel myself almost swooning with shame as I stood, a very small, round-faced boy in
short corduroy knickers, before the two women. I could not speak. I felt that I should die if ‘Mrs. Form’ were to beat
me. But my dominant feeling was not fear or even resentment: it was simply shame because one more person, and that a
woman, had been told of my disgusting offense.
A little later, I forget how, I learned that it was not after all ‘Mrs. Form’ who would do the beating. I cannot
remember whether it was that very night that I wetted my bed again, but at any rate I did wet it again quite soon. Oh,
the despair, the feeling of cruel injustice, after all my prayers and resolutions, at once again waking between the
clammy sheets! There was no chance of hiding what I had done. The grim statuesque matron, Daphne by name, arrived in
the dormitory specially to inspect my bed. She pulled back the clothes, then drew herself up, and the dreaded words
seemed to come rolling out of her like a peal of thunder:
‘REPORT YOURSELF to the headmaster after breakfast!’
I do not know how many times I heard that phrase during my early years at Crossgates. It was only very rarely that
it did not mean a beating. The words always had a portentous sound in my ears, like muffled drums or the words of the
death sentence.
When I arrived to report myself, Bingo was doing something or other at the long shiny table in the ante-room to the
study. Her uneasy eyes searched me as I went past. In the study Mr. Simpson, nicknamed Sim, was waiting. Sim was a
round-shouldered curiously oafish-looking man, not large but shambling in gait, with a chubby face which was like that
of an overgrown baby, and which was capable of good humor. He knew, of course, why I had been sent to him, and had
already taken a bone-handled riding crop out of the cupboard, but it was part of the punishment of reporting yourself
that you had to proclaim your offense with your own lips. When I had said my say, he read me a short but pompous
lecture, then seized me by the scruff of the neck, twisted me over and began beating me with the riding crop. He had a
habit of continuing his lecture while he flogged you, and I remember the words ‘you dirty little boy’ keeping time with
the blows. The beating did not hurt (perhaps as it was the first time, he was not hitting me very hard), and I walked
out feeling very much better. The fact that the beating had not hurt was a sort of victory and partially wiped out the
shame of the bed-wetting. I was even incautious enough to wear a grin on my face. Some small boys were hanging about in
the passage outside the door of the ante-room.
‘D’you get the cane?’
‘It didn’t hurt,’ I said proudly.
Bingo had heard everything. Instantly her voice came screaming after me:
‘Come here! Come here this instant! What was that you said?’
‘I said it didn’t hurt,’ I faltered out.
‘How dare you say a thing like that? Do you think that is a proper thing to say? Go in and REPORT YOURSELF
AGAIN!’
This time Sim laid on in real earnest. He continued for a length of time that frightened and astonished me — about
five minutes, it seemed — ending up by breaking the riding crop. The bone handle went flying across the room.
‘Look what you’ve made me do!’ he said furiously, holding up the broken crop.
I had fallen into a chair, weakly sniveling. I remember that this was the only time throughout my boyhood when a
beating actually reduced me to tears, and curiously enough I was not even now crying because of the pain. The second
beating had not hurt very much either. Fright and shame seemed to have anesthetized me. I was crying partly because I
felt that this was expected of me, partly from genuine repentance, but partly also because of a deeper grief which is
peculiar to childhood and not easy to convey: a sense of desolate loneliness and helplessness, of being locked up not
only in a hostile world but in a world of good and evil where the rules were such that it was actually not possible for
me to keep them.
I knew that bed-wetting was (a) wicked and (b) outside my control. The second fact I was personally aware of, and
the first I did not question. It was possible, therefore, to commit a sin without knowing that you committed it,
without wanting to commit it, and without being able to avoid it. Sin was not necessarily something that you did: it
might be something that happened to you. I do not want to claim that this idea flashed into my mind as a complete
novelty at this very moment, under the blows of Sim’s cane: I must have had glimpses of it even before I left home, for
my early childhood had not been altogether happy. But at any rate this was the great, abiding lesson of my boyhood:
that I was in a world where it was not possible for me to be good. And the double beating was a turning-point, for it
brought home to me for the first time the harshness of the environment into which I had been flung. Life was more
terrible, and I was more wicked, than I had imagined. At any rate, as I sat on the edge of a chair in Sim’s study, with
not even the self-possession to stand up while he stormed at me, I had a conviction of sin and folly and weakness, such
as I do not remember to have felt before.
In general, one’s memories of any period must necessarily weaken as one moves away from it. One is constantly
learning new facts, and old ones have to drop out to make way for them. At twenty I could have written the history of
my schooldays with an accuracy which would be quite impossible now. But it can also happen that one’s memories grow
sharper after a long lapse of time, because one is looking at the past with fresh eyes and can isolate and, as it were,
notice facts which previously existed undifferentiated among a mass of others. Here are two things which in a sense I
remembered, but which did not strike me as strange or interesting until quite recently. One is that the second beating
seemed to me a just and reasonable punishment. To get one beating, and then to get another and far fiercer one on top
of it, for being so unwise as to show that the first had not hurt — that was quite natural. The gods are jealous, and
when you have good fortune you should conceal it. The other is that I accepted the broken riding crop as my own crime.
I can still recall my feeling as I saw the handle lying on the carpet — the feeling of having done an ill-bred clumsy
thing, and ruined an expensive object. I had broken it: so Sim told me, and so I believed. This acceptance of guilt lay
unnoticed in my memory for twenty or thirty years.
So much for the episode of the bed-wetting. But there is one more thing to be remarked. That is that I did not wet
my bed again — at least, I did wet it once again, and received another beating, after which the trouble stopped. So
perhaps this barbarous remedy does work, though at a heavy price, I have no doubt.
All this was thirty years ago and more. The question is: Does a child at school go through the same kind of
experiences nowadays?
The only honest answer, I believe, is that we do not with certainty know. Of course it is obvious that the
present-day attitude towards education is enormously more humane and sensible than that of the past. The snobbishness
that was an integral part of my own education would be almost unthinkable today, because the society that nourished it
is dead. I recall a conversation that must have taken place about a year before I left Crossgates. A Russian boy, large
and fair-haired, a year older than myself, was questioning me.
‘How much a-year has your father got?’
I told him what I thought it was, adding a few hundreds to make it sound better. The Russian boy, neat in his
habits, produced a pencil and a small notebook and made a calculation.
‘My father has over two hundred times as much money as yours,’ he announced with a sort of amused contempt.
That was in 1915. What happened to that money a couple of years later, I wonder? And still more I wonder, do
conversations of that kind happen at preparatory schools now?
Clearly there has been a vast change of outlook, a general growth of ‘enlightenment,’ even among ordinary,
unthinking middle-class people. Religious belief, for instance, has largely vanished, dragging other kinds of nonsense
after it. I imagine that very few people nowadays would tell a child that if it masturbates it will end in the lunatic
asylum. Beating, too, has become discredited, and has even been abandoned at many schools. Nor is the underfeeding of
children looked on as a normal, almost meritorious act. No one now would openly set out to give his pupils as little
food as they could do with, or tell them that it is healthy to get up from a meal as hungry as you sat down. The whole
status of children has improved, partly because they have grown relatively less numerous. And the diffusion of even a
little psychological knowledge has made it harder for parents and schoolteachers to indulge their aberrations in the
name of discipline. Here is a case, not known to me personally, but known to someone I can vouch for, and happening
within my own lifetime. A small girl, daughter of a clergyman, continued wetting her bed at an age when she should have
grown out of it. In order to punish her for this dreadful deed, her father took her to a large garden party and there
introduced her to the whole company as a little girl who wetted her bed: and to underline her wickedness he had
previously painted her face black. I do not suggest that Bingo and Sim would actually have done a thing like this, but
I doubt whether it would have much surprised them. After all, things do change. And yet —!
The question is not whether boys are still buckled into Eton collars on Sunday, or told that babies are dug up under
gooseberry bushes. That kind of thing is at an end, admittedly. The real question is whether it is still normal for a
school child to live for years amid irrational terrors and lunatic misunderstandings. And here one is up against the
very great difficulty of knowing what a child really feels and thinks. A child which appears reasonably happy may
actually be suffering horrors which it cannot or will not reveal. It lives in a sort of alien under-water world which
we can only penetrate by memory or divination. Our chief clue is the fact that we were once children ourselves, and
many people appear to forget the atmosphere of their own childhood almost entirely. Think for instance of the
unnecessary torments that people will inflict by sending a child back to school with clothes of the wrong pattern, and
refusing to see that this matters! Over things of this kind a child will sometimes utter a protest, but a great deal of
the time its attitude is one of simple concealment. Not to expose your true feelings to an adult seems to be
instinctive from the age of seven or eight onwards. Even the affection that one feels for a child, the desire to
protect and cherish it, is a cause of misunderstanding. One can love a child, perhaps, more deeply than one can love
another adult, but is rash to assume that the child feels any love in return. Looking back on my own childhood, after
the infant years were over, I do not believe that I ever felt love for any mature person, except my mother, and even
her I did not trust, in the sense that shyness made me conceal most of my real feelings from her. Love, the
spontaneous, unqualified emotion of love, was something I could only feel for people who were young. Towards people who
were old — and remember that ‘old’ to a child means over thirty, or even over twenty-five — I could feel reverence,
respect, admiration or compunction, but I seemed cut off from them by a veil of fear and shyness mixed up with physical
distaste. People are too ready to forget the child’s physical shrinking from the adult. The enormous size of grownups,
their ungainly, rigid bodies, their coarse wrinkled skins, their great relaxed eyelids, their yellow teeth, and the
whiffs of musty clothes and beer and sweat and tobacco that disengage from them at every movement! Part of the reason
for the ugliness of adults, in a child’s eyes, is that the child is usually looking upwards, and few faces are at their
best when seen from below. Besides, being fresh and unmarked itself, the child has impossibly high standards in the
matter of skin and teeth and complexion. But the greatest barrier of all is the child’s misconception about age. A
child can hardly envisage life beyond thirty, and in judging people’s ages it will make fantastic mistakes. It will
think that a person of twenty-five is forty, that a person of forty is sixty-five, and so on. Thus, when I fell in love
with Elsie I took her to be grown up. I met her again, when I was thirteen and she, I think, must have been
twenty-three; she now seemed to me a middle-aged woman, somewhat past her best. And the child thinks of growing old as
an almost obscene calamity, which for some mysterious reason will never happen to itself. All who have passed the age
of thirty are joyless grotesques, endlessly fussing about things of no importance and staying alive without, so far as
the child can see, having anything to live for. Only child life is real life. The schoolmaster who imagines he is loved
and trusted by his boys is in fact mimicked and laughed at behind his back. An adult who does not seem dangerous nearly
always seems ridiculous.
I base these generalizations on what I can recall of my own childhood outlook. Treacherous though memory is, it
seems to me the chief means we have of discovering how a child’s mind works. Only by resurrecting our own memories can
we realize how incredibly distorted is the child’s vision of the world. Consider this, for example. How would
Crossgates appear to me now, if I could go back, at my present age, and see it as it was in 1915? What should I think
of Bingo and Sim, those terrible, all-powerful monsters? I should see them as a couple of silly, shallow, ineffectual
people, eagerly clambering up a social ladder which any thinking person could see to be on the point of collapse. I
would be no more frightened of them than I would be frightened of a dormouse. Moreover, in those days they seemed to me
fantastically old, whereas — though of this I am not certain — I imagine they must have been somewhat younger than I am
now. And how would Johnny Hall appear, with his blacksmith’s arms and his red, jeering face? Merely a scruffy little
boy, barely distinguishable from hundreds of other scruffy little boys. The two sets of facts can lie side by side in
my mind, because these happen to be my own memories. But it would be very difficult for me to see with the eyes of any
other child, except by an effort of the imagination which might lead me completely astray. The child and the adult live
in different worlds. If that is so, we cannot be certain that school, at any rate boarding school, is not still for
many children as dreadful an experience as it used to be. Take away God, Latin, the cane, class distinctions and sexual
taboos, and the fear, the hatred, the snobbery and the misunderstanding might still all be there. It will have been
seen that my own main trouble was an utter lack of any sense of proportion or probability. This led me to accept
outrages and believe absurdities, and to suffer torments over things which were in fact of no importance. It is not
enough to say that I was ‘silly’ and ‘ought to have known better.’ Look back into your own childhood and think of the
nonsense you used to believe and the trivialities which could make you suffer. Of course my own case had its individual
variations, but essentially it was that of countless other boys. The weakness of the child is that it starts with a
blank sheet. It neither understands nor questions the society in which it lives, and because of its credulity other
people can work upon it, infecting it with the sense of inferiority and the dread of offending against mysterious,
terrible laws. It may be that everything that happened to me at Crossgates could happen in the most ‘enlightened’
school, though perhaps in subtler forms. Of one thing, however, I do feel fairly sure, and that is that boarding
schools are worse than day schools. A child has a better chance with the sanctuary of its home near at hand. And I
think the characteristic faults of the English upper and middle classes may be partly due to the practice, general
until recently, of sending children away from home as young as nine, eight or even seven.
I have never been back to Crossgates. In a way it is only within the last decade that I have really thought over my
schooldays, vividly though their memory has haunted me. Nowadays, I believe, it would make very little impression on me
to see the place again, if it still exists. And if I went inside and smelled again the inky, dusty smell of the big
schoolroom, the rosiny smell of the chapel, the stagnant smell of the swimming bath and the cold reek of the
lavatories, I think I should only feel what one invariably feels in revisiting any scene of childhood: How small
everything has grown, and how terrible is the deterioration in myself!
