It was late-afternoon. Forty-nine of us, forty-eight men and one woman, lay on the green waiting for
the spike to open. We were too tired to talk much. We just sprawled about exhaustedly, with home-made cigarettes
sticking out of our scrubby faces. Overhead the chestnut branches were covered with blossom, and beyond that great
woolly clouds floated almost motionless in a clear sky. Littered on the grass, we seemed dingy, urban riff-raff. We
defiled the scene, like sardine-tins and paper bags on the seashore.
What talk there was ran on the Tramp Major of this spike. He was a devil, everyone agreed, a tartar, a tyrant, a
bawling. blasphemous, uncharitable dog. You couldn’t call your soul your own when he was about, and many a tramp had he
kicked out in the middle of the night for giving a back answer. When you came to be searched, he fair held you upside
down and shook you. If you were caught with tobacco there was hell to pay, and if you went in with money (which is
against the law) God help you.
I had eightpence on me. ‘For the love of Christ, mate,’ the old hands advised me, ‘don’t you take it in. You’d get
seven days for going into the spike with eightpence!’
So I buried my money in a hole under the hedge, marking the spot with a lump of flint. Then we set about smuggling
our matches and tobacco, for it is forbidden to take these into nearly all spikes, and one is supposed to surrender
them at the gate. We hid them in our socks, except for the twenty or so per cent who had no socks, and had to carry the
tobacco in their boots, even under their very toes. We stuffed our ankles with contraband until anyone seeing us might
have imagined an outbreak of elephantiasis. But it is an unwritten law that even the sternest Tramp Majors do not
search below the knee, and in the end only one man was caught. This was Scotty, a little hairy tramp with a bastard
accent sired by cockney out of Glasgow. His tin of cigarette ends fell out of his sock at the wrong moment, and was
impounded.
At six, the gates swung open and we shuffled in. An official at the gate entered our names and other particulars in
the register and took our bundles away from us. The woman was sent off to the workhouse, and we others into the spike.
It was a gloomy, chilly, limewashed place, consisting only of a bathroom and dining-room and about a hundred narrow
stone cells. The terrible Tramp Major met us at the door and herded us into the bathroom to be stripped and searched.
He was a gruff, soldierly man of forty who gave the tramps no more ceremony than sheep at the dipping-pond, shoving
them this way and that and shouting oaths in their faces. But when he came to myself he looked hard at me, and
said:
‘You are a gentleman?’
‘I suppose so,’ I said.
He gave me another long look. ‘Well, that’s bloody bad luck, guv’nor,’ he said, ‘that’s bloody bad luck, that is.’
And thereafter he took it into his head to treat me with compassion, even with a kind of respect.
It was a disgusting sight, that bathroom. All the indecent secrets of our underwear were exposed; the grime, the
rents and patches, the bits of string doing duty for buttons, the layers upon layers of fragmentary garments, some of
them mere collections of holes, held together by dirt. The room became a press of steaming nudity, the sweaty odours of
the tramps competing with the sickly, sub-faecal stench native to the spike. Some of the men refused the bath, and
washed only their ‘toe-rags’, the horrid, greasy little clouts which tramps bind round their feet. Each of us had three
minutes in which to bathe himself. Six greasy, slippery roller towels had to serve for the lot of us.
When we had bathed our own clothes were taken away from us, and we were dressed in the workhouse shirts, grey cotton
things like nightshirts, reaching to the middle of the thigh. Then we were sent into the diningroom, where supper was
set out on the deal tables. It was the invariable spike meal, always the same, whether breakfast, dinner or supper —
half a pound of bread, a bit of margarine, and a pint of so-called tea. It took us five minutes to gulp down the cheap,
noxious food. Then the Tramp Major served us with three cotton blankets each, and drove us off to our cells for the
night. The doors were locked on the outside a little before seven in the evening, and would stay locked for the next
twelve hours.
The cells measured eight feet by five, and, had no lighting apparatus except a tiny barred window high up in the
wall, and a spyhole in the door. There were no bugs, and we had bedsteads and straw palliasses, rare luxuries both. In
many spikes one sleeps on a wooden shelf, and in some on the bare floor, with a rolled-up coat for pillow. With a cell
to myself, and a bed, I was hoping for a sound night’s rest. But I did not get it, for there is always something wrong
in the spike, and the peculiar shortcoming here, as I discovered immediately, was the cold. May had begun, and in
honour of the season — a little sacrifice to the gods of spring, perhaps — the authorities had cut off the steam from
the hot pipes. The cotton blankets were almost useless. One spent the night in turning from side to side, falling
asleep for ten minutes and waking half frozen, and watching for dawn.
As always happens in the spike, I had at last managed to fall comfortably asleep when it was time to get up. The
Tramp Major came marching down the passage with his heavy tread, unlocking the doors and yelling to us to show a leg.
Promptly the passage was full of squalid shirt-clad figures rushing for the bathroom, for there was Only One tub full
of water between us all in the morning, and it was first come first served. When I arrived twenty tramps had already
washed their faces. I gave one glance at the black scum on top of the water, and decided to go dirty for the day.
We hurried into our clothes, and then went to the diningroom to bolt our breakfast. The bread was much worse than
usual, because the military-minded idiot of a Tramp Major had cut it into slices overnight, so that it was as hard as
ship’s biscuit. But we were glad of our tea after the cold, restless night. I do not know what tramps would do without
tea, or rather the stuff they miscall tea. It is their food, their medicine, their panacea for all evils. Without the
half goon or so of it that they suck down a day, I truly believe they could not face their existence.
After breakfast we had to undress again for the medical inspection, which is a precaution against smallpox. It was
three quarters of an hour before the doctor arrived, and one had time now to look about him and see what manner of men
we were. It, was an instructive sight. We stood shivering naked to the waist in two long ranks in the passage. The
filtered light, bluish and cold, lighted us up with unmerciful clarity. No one can imagine, unless he has seen such a
thing, what pot-bellied, degenerate curs we looked. Shock heads, hairy, crumpled faces, hollow chests, flat feet,
sagging muscles — every kind of malformation and physical rottenness were there. All were flabby and discoloured, as
all tramps are under their deceptive sunburn. Two or three figures wen there stay ineradicably in my mind. Old ‘Daddy’,
aged seventy-four, with his truss, and his red, watering eyes, a herring-gutted starveling with sparse beard and sunken
cheeks, looking like the corpse of Lazarus in some primitive picture: an imbecile, wandering hither and thither with
vague giggles, coyly pleased because his trousers constantly slipped down and left him nude. But few of us were greatly
better than these; there were not ten decently built men among us, and half, I believe, should have been in
hospital.
This being Sunday, we were to be kept in the spike over the week-end. As soon as the doctor had gone we were herded
back to the dining-room, and its door shut upon us. It was a lime-washed, stone-floored room, unspeakably dreary with
its furniture of deal boards and benches, and its prison smell. The windows were so high up that one could not look
outside, and the sole ornament was a set of Rules threatening dire penalties to any casual who misconducted himself. We
packed the room so tight that one could not move an elbow without jostling somebody. Already, at eight o’clock in the
morning, we were bored with our captivity. There was nothing to talk about except the petty gossip of the road, the
good and bad spikes, the charitable and uncharitable counties, the iniquities of the police and the Salvation Army.
Tramps hardly ever get away from these subjects; they talk, as it were, nothing but shop. They have nothing worthy to
be called conversation, bemuse emptiness of belly leaves no speculation in their souls. The world is too much with
them. Their next meal is never quite secure, and so they cannot think of anything except the next meal.
Two hours dragged by. Old Daddy, witless with age, sat silent, his back bent like a bow and his inflamed eyes
dripping slowly on to the floor. George, a dirty old tramp notorious for the queer habit of sleeping in his hat,
grumbled about a parcel of tommy that he had lost on the toad. Bill the moocher, the best built man of us all, a
Herculean sturdy beggar who smelt of beer even after twelve hours in the spike, told tales of mooching, of pints stood
him in the boozers, and of a parson who had peached to the police and got him seven days. William and, Fred, two young
ex-fishermen from Norfolk, sang a sad song about Unhappy Bella, who was betrayed and died in the snow. The imbecile
drivelled, about an imaginary toff, who had once given him two hundred and fifty-seven golden sovereigns. So the time
passed, with dun talk and dull obscenities. Everyone was smoking, except Scotty, whose tobacco had been seized, and he
was so miserable in his smokeless state that I stood him the makings of a cigarette. We smoked furtively, hiding our
cigarettes like schoolboys when we heard the Tramp Major’s step, for smoking though connived at, was officially
forbidden.
Most of the tramps spent ten consecutive hours in this dreary room. It is hard to imagine how they put up with 11. I
have come to think that boredom is the worst of all a tramp’s evils, worse than hunger and discomfort, worse even than
the constant feeling of being socially disgraced. It is a silly piece of cruelty to confine an ignorant man all day
with nothing to do; it is like chaining a dog in a barrel. Only an educated man, who has consolations within himself,
can endure confinement. Tramps, unlettered types as nearly all of them are, face their poverty with blank, resourceless
minds. Fixed for ten hours on a comfortless bench, they know no way of occupying themselves, and if they think at all
it is to whimper about hard luck and pine for work. They have not the stuff in them to endure the horrors of idleness.
And so, since so much of their lives is spent in doing nothing, they suffer agonies from boredom.
I was much luckier than the others, because at ten o’clock the Tramp Major picked me out for the most coveted of all
jobs in the spike, the job of helping in the workhouse kitchen. There was not really any work to be done there, and I
was able to make off and hide in a shed used for storing potatoes, together with some workhouse paupers who were
skulking to avoid the Sunday-morning service. There was a stove burning there, and comfortable packing cases to sit on,
and back numbers of the FAMILY HERALD, and even a copy of RAFFLES from the workhouse library. It was paradise after the
spike.
Also, I had my dinner from the workhouse table, and it was one of the biggest meals I have ever eaten. A tramp does
not see such a meal twice in the year, in the spike or out of it. The paupers told me that they always gorged to the
bursting point on Sundays, and went hungry six days of the week. When the meal was over the cook set me to do the
washing-up, and told me to throw away the food that remained. The wastage was astonishing; great dishes of beef, and
bucketfuls of broad and vegetables, were pitched away like rubbish, and then defiled with tea-leaves. I filled five
dustbins to overflowing with good food. And while I did so my follow tramps were sitting two hundred yards away in the
spike, their bellies half filled with the spike dinner of the everlasting bread and tea, and perhaps two cold boiled
potatoes each in honour of Sunday. It appeared that the food was thrown away from deliberate policy, rather than that
it should be given to the tramps.
At three I left the workhouse kitchen and went back to the spike. The, boredom in that crowded, comfortless room was
now unbearable. Even smoking had ceased, for a tramp’s only tobacco is picked-up cigarette ends, and, like a browsing
beast, he starves if he is long away from the pavement-pasture. To occupy the time I talked with a rather superior
tramp, a young carpenter who wore a collar and tie, and was on the road, he said, for lack of a set of tools. He kept a
little aloof from the other tramps, and held himself more like a free man than a casual. He had literary tastes, too,
and carried one of Scott’s novels on all his wanderings. He told me he never entered a spike unless driven there by
hunger, sleeping under hedges and behind ricks in preference. Along the south coast he had begged by day and slept in
bathing-machines for weeks at a time.
We talked of life on the road. He criticized the system which makes a tramp spend fourteen hours a day in the spike,
and the other ten in walking and dodging the police. He spoke of his own case — six months at the public charge for
want of three pounds’ worth of tools. It was idiotic, he said.
Then I told him about the wastage of food in the workhouse kitchen, and what I thought of it. And at that he changed
his tune immediately. I saw that I had awakened the pew-renter who sleeps in every English workman. Though he had been
famished along with the rest, he at once saw reasons why the food should have been thrown away rather than given to the
tramps. He admonished me quite severely.
‘They have to do it,’ he said. ‘If they made these places too pleasant you’d have all the scum of the country
flocking into them. It’s only the bad food as keeps all that scum away. These tramps are too lazy to work, that’s all
that’s wrong with them. You don’t want to go encouraging of them. They’re scum.’
I produced arguments to prove him wrong, but he would not listen. He kept repeating:
‘You don’t want to have any pity on these tramps — scum, they are. You don’t want to judge them by the same
standards as men like you and me. They’re scum, just scum.’
It was interesting to see how subtly he disassociated himself from his fellow tramps. He has been on the road six
months, but in the sight of God, he seemed to imply, he was not a tramp. His body might be in the spike, but his spirit
soared far away, in the pure aether of the middle classes.
The clock’s hands crept round with excruciating slowness. We were too bored even to talk now, the only sound was of
oaths and reverberating yawns. One would force his eyes away from the clock for what seemed an age, and then look back
again to see that the hands had advanced three minutes. Ennui clogged our souls like cold mutton fat. Our bones ached
because of it. The clock’s hands stood at four, and supper was not till six, and there was nothing left remarkable
beneath the visiting moon.
At last six o’clock did come, and the Tramp Major and his assistant arrived with supper. The yawning tramps brisked
up like lions at feeding-time. But the meal was a dismal disappointment. The bread, bad enough in the morning, was now
positively uneatable; it was so hard that even the strongest jaws could make little impression on it. The older men
went almost supperless, and not a man could finish his portion, hungry though most of us were. When we had finished,
the blankets were served out immediately, and we were hustled off once more to the bare, chilly cells.
Thirteen hours went by. At seven we were awakened, and rushed forth to squabble over the water in the bathroom, and
bolt our ration of bread and tea. Our time in the spike was up, but we could riot go until the doctor had examined us
again, for the authorities have a terror of smallpox and its distribution by tramps. The doctor kept us waiting two
hours this time, and it was ten o’clock before we finally escaped.
At last it was time to go, and we were let out into the yard. How bright everything looked, and how sweet the winds
did blow, after the gloomy, reeking spike! The Tramp Major handed each man his bundle of confiscated possessions, and a
hunk of bread and cheese for midday dinner, and then we took the road, hastening to get out of sight of the spike and
its discipline, This was our interim of freedom. After a day and two nights of wasted time we had eight hours or so to
take our recreation, to scour the roads for cigarette ends, to beg, and to look for work. Also, we had to make our ten,
fifteen, or it might be twenty miles to the next spike, where the game would begin anew.
I disinterred my eightpence and took the road with Nobby, a respectable, downhearted tramp who carried a spare pair
of boots and visited all the Labour Exchanges. Our late companions were scattering north, south, cast and west, like
bugs into a mattress. Only the imbecile loitered at the spike gates, until the Tramp Major had to chase him away.
Nobby and I set out for Croydon. It was a quiet road, there were no cars passing, the blossom covered the chestnut
trees like great wax candles. Everything was so quiet and smelt so clean, it was hard to realize that only a few
minutes ago we had been packed with that band of prisoners in a stench of drains and soft soap. The others had all
disappeared; we two seemed to be the only tramps on the road.
Then I heard a hurried step behind me, and felt a tap on my arm. It was little Scotty, who had run panting after us.
He pulled a rusty tin box from his pocket. He wore a friendly smile, like a man who is repaying an obligation.
‘Here y’are, mate,’ he said cordially. ‘I owe you some fag ends. You stood me a smoke yesterday. The Tramp Major
give me back my box of fag ends when we come out this morning. One good turn deserves another — here y’are.’
And he put four sodden, debauched, loathly cigarette ends into my hand.
