There are about 400,000 known Jews in Britain, and in addition some thousands or, at most, scores of
thousands of Jewish refugees who have entered the country from 1934 onwards. The Jewish population is almost entirely
concentrated in half a dozen big towns and is mostly employed in the food, clothing and furniture trades. A few of the
big monopolies, such as the ICI, one or two leading newspapers and at least one big chain of department stores are
Jewish-owned or partly Jewish-owned, but it would be very far from the truth to say that British business life is
dominated by Jews. The Jews seem, on the contrary, to have failed to keep up with the modern tendency towards big
amalgamations and to have remained fixed in those trades which are necessarily carried out on a small scale and by
old-fashioned methods.
I start off with these background facts, which are already known to any well-informed person, in order to emphasise
that there is no real Jewish “problem” in England. The Jews are not numerous or powerful enough, and it is only in what
are loosely called “intellectual circles” that they have any noticeable influence. Yet it is generally admitted that
antisemitism is on the increase, that it has been greatly exacerbated by the war, and that humane and enlightened
people are not immune to it. It does not take violent forms (English people are almost invariably gentle and
law-abiding), but it is ill-natured enough, and in favourable circumstances it could have political results. Here are
some samples of antisemitic remarks that have been made to me during the past year or two:
Middle-aged office employee: “I generally come to work by bus. It takes longer, but I don’t care about using the
Underground from Golders Green nowadays. There’s too many of the Chosen Race travelling on that line.”
Tobacconist (woman): “No, I’ve got no matches for you. I should try the lady down the street. SHE’S always got
matches. One of the Chosen Race, you see.”
Young intellectual, Communist or near-Communist: “No, I do NOT like Jews. I’ve never made any secret of that. I
can’t stick them. Mind you, I’m not antisemitic, of course.”
Middle-class woman: “Well, no one could call me antisemitic, but I do think the way these Jews behave is too
absolutely stinking. The way they push their way to the head of queues, and so on. They’re so abominably selfish. I
think they’re responsible for a lot of what happens to them.”
Milk roundsman: “A Jew don’t do no work, not the same as what an Englishman does. ‘E’s too clever. We work with this
‘ere” (flexes his biceps). “They work with that there” (taps his forehead).
Chartered accountant, intelligent, left-wing in an undirected way: “These bloody Yids are all pro-German. They’d
change sides tomorrow if the Nazis got here. I see a lot of them in my business. They admire Hitler at the bottom of
their hearts. They’ll always suck up to anyone who kicks them.”
Intelligent woman, on being offered a book dealing with antisemitism and German atrocities: “Don’t show it me,
PLEASE don’t show it to me. It’ll only make me hate the Jews more than ever.”
I could fill pages with similar remarks, but these will do to go on with. Two facts emerge from them. One — which is
very important and which I must return to in a moment — is that above a certain intellectual level people are ashamed
of being antisemitic and are careful to draw a distinction between “antisemitism” and “disliking Jews”. The other is
that antisemitism is an irrational thing. The Jews are accused of specific offences (for instance, bad behaviour in
food queues) which the person speaking feels strongly about, but it is obvious that these accusations merely
rationalise some deep-rooted prejudice. To attempt to counter them with facts and statistics is useless, and may
sometimes be worse than useless. As the last of the above-quoted remarks shows, people can remain antisemitic, or at
least anti-Jewish, while being fully aware that their outlook is indefensible. If you dislike somebody, you dislike him
and there is an end of it: your feelings are not made any better by a recital of his virtues.
It so happens that the war has encouraged the growth of antisemitism and even, in the eyes of many ordinary people,
given some justification for it. To begin with, the Jews are one people of whom it can be said with complete certainty
that they will benefit by an Allied victory. Consequently the theory that “this is a Jewish war” has a certain
plausibility, all the more so because the Jewish war effort seldom gets its fair share of recognition. The British
Empire is a huge heterogeneous organisation held together largely by mutual consent, and it is often necessary to
flatter the less reliable elements at the expense of the more loyal ones. To publicise the exploits of Jewish soldiers,
or even to admit the existence of a considerable Jewish army in the Middle East, rouses hostility in South Africa, the
Arab coun tries and elsewhere: it is easier to ignore the whole subject and allow the man in the street to go on
thinking that Jews are exceptionally clever at dodging military service. Then again, Jews are to be found in exactly
those trades which are bound to incur unpopularity with the civilian public in war-time. Jews are mostly concerned with
selling food, clothes, furniture and tobacco — exactly the commodities of which there is a chronic shortage, with
consequent overcharging, black-marketing and favouritism. And again, the common charge that Jews behave in an
exceptionally cowardly way during air raids was given a certain amount of colour by the big raids of 1940. As it
happened, the Jewish quarter of Whitechapel was one of the first areas to be heavily blitzed, with the natural result
that swarms of Jewish refugees distributed themselves all over London. If one judged merely from these war-time
phenomena, it would be easy to imagine that antisemitism is a quasi-rational thing, founded on mistaken premises. And
naturally the antisemite thinks of himself as a reasonable being. Whenever I have touched on this subject in a
newspaper article, I have always had a considerable “come-back”, and invariably some of the letters are from
well-balanced, middling people — doctors, for example — with no apparent economic grievance. These people always say
(as Hitler says in MEIN KAMPF) that they started out with no anti-Jewish prejudice but were driven into their present
position by mere observation of the facts. Yet one of the marks of antisemitism is an ability to believe stories that
could not possibly be true. One could see a good example of this in the strange accident that occurred in London in
1942, when a crowd, frightened by a bomb-burst nearby, fled into the mouth of an Underground station, with the result
that something over a hundred people were crushed to death. The very same day it was repeated all over London that “the
Jews were responsible”. Clearly, if people will believe this kind of thing, one will not get much further by arguing
with them. The only useful approach is to discover WHY they can swallow absurdities on one particular subject while
remaining sane on others.
But now let me come back to that point I mentioned earlier — that there is widespread awareness of the prevalence of
antisemitic feeling, and unwillingness to admit sharing it. Among educated people, antisemitism is held to be an
unforgivable sin and in a quite different category from other kinds of racial prejudice. People will go to remarkable
lengths to demonstrate that they are NOT antisemitic. Thus, in 1943 an intercession service on behalf of the Polish
Jews was held in a synagogue in St John’s Wood. The local authorities declared themselves anxious to participate in it,
and the service was attended by the mayor of the borough in his robes and chain, by representatives of all the
churches, and by detachments of RAF, Home Guards, nurses, Boy Scouts and what not. On the surface it was a touching
demonstration of solidarity with the suffering Jews. But it was essentially a CONSCIOUS effort to behave decently by
people whose subjective feelings must in many cases have been very different. That quarter of London is partly Jewish,
antisemitism is rife there, and, as I well knew, some of the men sitting round me in the synagogue were tinged by it.
Indeed, the commander of my own platoon of Home Guards, who had been especially keen beforehand that we should “make a
good show” at the intercession service, was an ex-member of Mosley’s Blackshirts. While this division of feeling
exists, tolerance of mass violence against Jews, or, what is more important, antisemitic legislation, are not possible
in England. It is not at present possible, indeed, that antisemitism should BECOME RESPECTABLE. But this is less of an
advantage than it might appear.
One effect of the persecutions in Germany has been to prevent antisemitism from being seriously studied. In England
a brief inadequate survey was made by Mass Observation a year or two ago, but if there has been any other investigation
of the subject, then its findings have been kept strictly secret. At the same time there has been conscious
suppression, by all thoughtful people, of anything likely to wound Jewish susceptibilities. After 1934 the Jew joke
disappeared as though by magic from postcards, periodicals and the music-hall stage, and to put an unsympathetic Jewish
character into a novel or short story came to be regarded as antisemitism. On the Palestine issue, too, it was DE
RIGUEUR among enlightened people to accept the Jewish case as proved and avoid examining the claims of the Arabs — a
decision which might be correct on its own merits, but which was adopted primarily because the Jews were in trouble and
it was felt that one must not criticise them. Thanks to Hitler, therefore, you had a situation in which the press was
in effect censored in favour of the Jews while in private antisemitism was on the up-grade, even, to some extent, among
sensitive and intelligent people. This was particularly noticeable in 1940 at the time of the internment of the
refugees. Naturally, every thinking person felt that it was his duty to protest against the wholesale locking-up of
unfortunate foreigners who for the most part were only in England because they were opponents of Hitler. Privately,
however, one heard very different sentiments expressed. A minority of the refugees behaved in an exceedingly tactless
way, and the feeling against them necessarily had an antisemitic undercurrent, since they were largely Jews. A very
eminent figure in the Labour Party — I won’t name him, but he is one of the most respected people in England — said to
me quite violently: “We never asked these people to come to this country. If they choose to come here, let them take
the consequences.” Yet this man would as a matter of course have associated himself with any kind of petition or
manifesto against the internment of aliens. This feeling that antisemitism is something sinful and disgraceful,
something that a civilised person does not suffer from, is unfavourable to a scientific approach, and indeed many
people will admit that they are frightened of probing too deeply into the subject. They are frightened, that is to say,
of discovering not only that antisemitism is spreading, but that they themselves are infected by it.
To see this in perspective one must look back a few decades, to the days when Hitler was an out-of-work
house-painter whom nobody had heard of. One would then find that though antisemitism is sufficiently in evidence now,
it is probably LESS prevalent in England than it was thirty years ago. It is true that antisemitism as a fully
thought-out racial or religious doctrine has never flourished in England. There has never been much feeling against
inter-marriage, or against Jews taking a prominent part in public life. Nevertheless, thirty years ago it was accepted
more or less as a law of nature that a Jew was a figure of fun and — though superior in intelligence — slightly
deficient in “character”. In theory a Jew suffered from no legal disabilities, but in effect he was debarred from
certain professions. He would probably not have been accepted as an officer in the navy, for instance, nor in what is
called a “smart” regiment in the army. A Jewish boy at a public school almost invariably had a bad time. He could, of
course, live down his Jewishness if he was exceptionally charming or athletic, but it was an initial disability
comparable to a stammer or a birthmark. Wealthy Jews tended to disguise themselves under aristocratic English or
Scottish names, and to the average person it seemed quite natural that they should do this, just as it seems natural
for a criminal to change his identity if possible. About twenty years ago, in Rangoon, I was getting into a taxi with a
friend when a small ragged boy of fair complexion rushed up to us and began a complicated story about having arrived
from Colombo on a ship and wanting money to get back. His manner and appearance were difficult to “place”, and I said
to him:
“You speak very good English. What nationality are you?”
He answered eagerly in his chi-chi accent: “I am a JOO, sir!”
And I remember turning to my companion and saying, only partly in joke, “He admits it openly.” All the Jews I had
known till then were people who were ashamed of being Jews, or at any rate preferred not to talk about their ancestry,
and if forced to do so tended to use the word “Hebrew”.
The working-class attitude was no better. The Jew who grew up in Whitechapel took it for granted that he would be
assaulted, or at least hooted at, if he ventured into one of the Christian slums nearby, and the “Jew joke” of the
music halls and the comic papers was almost consistently ill-natured.* There was also literary Jew-baiting, which in
the hands of Belloc, Chesterton and their followers reached an almost continental level of scurrility. Non-Catholic
writers were sometimes guilty of the same thing in a milder form. There has been a perceptible antisemitic strain in
English literature from Chaucer onwards, and without even getting up from this table to consult a book I can think of
passages which IF WRITTEN NOW would be stigmatised as antisemitism, in the works of Shakespeare, Smollett, Thackeray,
Bernard Shaw, H. G. Wells, T. S. Eliot, Aldous Huxley and various others. Offhand, the only English writers I can think
of who, before the days of Hitler, made a definite effort to stick up for Jews are Dickens and Charles Reade. And
however little the average intellectual may have agreed with the opinions of Belloc and Chesterton, he did not acutely
disapprove of them. Chesterton’s endless tirades against Jews, which he thrust into stories and essays upon the
flimsiest pretexts, never got him into trouble — indeed Chesterton was one of the most generally respected figures in
English literary life. Anyone who wrote in that strain NOW would bring down a storm of abuse upon himself, or more
probably would find it impossible to get his writings published.
* It is interesting to compare the “Jew joke” with that other stand-by of the music halls, the “Scotch
joke”, which superficially it resembles. Occasionally a story is told (e.g. the Jew and the Scotsman who went into a
pub together and both died of thirst) which puts both races on an equality, but in general the Jew is credited MERELY
with cunning and avarice while the Scotsman is credited with physical hardihood as well. This is seen, for example, in
the story of the Jew and the Scotsman who go together to a meeting which has been advertised as free. Unexpectedly
there is a collection, and to avoid this the Jew faints and the Scotsman carries him out. Here the Scotsman performs
the athletic feat of carrying the other. It would seem vaguely wrong if it were the other way about. (Author’s
footnote.)
If, as I suggest, prejudice against Jews has always been pretty widespread in England, there is no reason to think
that Hitler has genuinely diminished it. He has merely caused a sharp division between the politically conscious person
who realises that this is not a time to throw stones at the Jews, and the unconscious person whose native antisemitism
is increased by the nervous strain of the war. One can assume, therefore, that many people who would perish rather than
admit to antisemitic feelings are secretly prone to them. I have already indicated that I believe antisemitism to be
essentially a neurosis, but of course it has its rationalisations, which are sincerely believed in and are partly true.
The rationalisation put forward by the common man is that the Jew is an exploiter. The partial justification for this
is that the Jew, in England, is generally a small businessman — that is to say a person whose depredations are more
obvious and intelligible than those of, say, a bank or an insurance company. Higher up the intellectual scale,
antisemitism is rationalised by saying that the Jew is a person who spreads disaffection and weakens national morale.
Again there is some superficial justification for this. During the past twenty-five years the activities of what are
called “intellectuals” have been largely mischievous. I do not think it an exaggeration to say that if the
“intellectuals” had done their work a little more thoroughly, Britain would have surrendered in 1940. But the
disaffected intelligentsia inevitably included a large number of Jews. With some plausibility it can be said that the
Jews are the enemies of our native culture and our national morale. Carefully examined, the claim is seen to be
nonsense, but there are always a few prominent individuals who can be cited in support of it. During the past few years
there has been what amounts to a counter-attack against the rather shallow Leftism which was fashionable in the
previous decade and which was exemplified by such organisations as the Left Book Club. This counter-attack (see for
instance such books as Arnold Lutin’s THE GOOD GORILLA or Evelyn Waugh’s PUT OUT MORE FLAGS) has an antisemitic strain,
and it would probably be more marked if the subject were not so obviously dangerous. It so happens that for some
decades past Britain has had no nationalist intelligentsia worth bothering about. But British nationalism, i.e.
nationalism of an intellectual kind, may revive, and probably will revive if Britain comes out of the present war
greatly weakened. The young intellectuals of 1950 may be as naively patriotic as those of 1914. In that case the kind
of antisemitism which flourished among the anti-Dreyfusards in France, and which Chesterton and Belloc tried to import
into this country, might get a foothold.
I have no hard-and-fast theory about the origins of antisemitism. The two current explanations, that it is due to
economic causes, or on the other hand, that it is a legacy from the Middle Ages, seem to me unsatisfactory, though I
admit that if one combines them they can be made to cover the facts. All I would say with confidence is that
antisemitism is part of the larger problem of nationalism, which has not yet been seriously examined, and that the Jew
is evidently a scapegoat, though for what he is a scapegoat we do not yet know. In this essay I have relied almost
entirely on my own limited experience, and perhaps every one of my conclusions would be negatived by other observers.
The fact is that there are almost no data on this subject. But for what they are worth I will summarise my opinions.
Boiled down, they amount to this:
There is more antisemitism in England than we care to admit, and the war has accentuated it, but it is not certain
that it is on the increase if one thinks in terms of decades rather than years.
It does not at present lead to open persecution, but it has the effect of making people callous to the sufferings of
Jews in other countries.
It is at bottom quite irrational and will not yield to argument.
The persecutions in Germany have caused much concealment of antisemitic feeling and thus obscured the whole
picture.
The subject needs serious investigation.
Only the last point is worth expanding. To study any subject scientifically one needs a detached attitude, which is
obviously harder when one’s own interests or emotions are involved. Plenty of people who are quite capable of being
objective about sea urchins, say, or the square root of 2, become schizophrenic if they have to think about the sources
of their own income. What vitiates nearly all that is written about antisemitism is the assumption in the writer’s mind
that HE HIMSELF is immune to it. “Since I know that antisemitism is irrational,” he argues, “it follows that I do not
share it.” He thus fails to start his investigation in the one place where he could get hold of some reliable evidence
— that is, in his own mind.
It seems to me a safe assumption that the disease loosely called nationalism is now almost universal. Antisemitism
is only one manifestation of nationalism, and not everyone will have the disease in that particular form. A Jew, for
example, would not be antisemitic: but then many Zionist Jews seem to me to be merely antisemites turned upside-down,
just as many Indians and Negroes display the normal colour prejudices in an inverted form. The point is that something,
some psychological vitamin, is lacking in modern civilisation, and as a result we are all more or less subject to this
lunacy of believing that whole races or nations are mysteriously good or mysteriously evil. I defy any modern
intellectual to look closely and honestly into his own mind without coming upon nationalistic loyalties and hatreds of
one kind or another. It is the fact that he can feel the emotional tug of such things, and yet see them dispassionately
for what they are, that gives him his status as an intellectual. It will be seen, therefore, that the starting point
for any investigation of antisemitism should not be “Why does this obviously irrational belief appeal to other people?”
but “Why does antisemitism appeal TO ME? What is there about it that I feel to be true?” If one asks this question one
at least discovers one’s own rationalisations, and it may be possible to find out what lies beneath them. Antisemitism
should be investigated — and I will not say by antisemites, but at any rate by people who know that they are not immune
to that kind of emotion. When Hitler has disappeared a real enquiry into this subject will be possible, and it would
probably be best to start not by debunking antisemitism, but by marshalling all the justifications for it that can be
found, in one’s own mind or anybody else’s. In that way one might get some clues that would lead to its psychological
roots. But that antisemitism will be definitively CURED, without curing the larger disease of nationalism, I do not
believe.
