You never walk far through any poor quarter in any big town without coming upon a small newsagent’s
shop. The general appearance of these shops is always very much the same: a few posters for the DAILY MAIL and the NEWS
OF THE WORLD outside, a poky little window with sweet-bottles and packets of Players, and a dark interior smelling of
liquorice allsorts and festooned from floor to ceiling with vilely printed twopenny papers, most of them with lurid
cover-illustrations in three colours.
Except for the daily and evening papers, the stock of these shops hardly overlaps at all with that of the big
news-agents. Their main selling line is the twopenny weekly, and the number and variety of these are almost
unbelievable. Every hobby and pastime — cage-birds, fretwork, carpentering, bees, carrier-pigeons, home conjuring,
philately, chess — has at least one paper devoted to it, and generally several. Gardening and livestock-keeping must
have at least a score between them. Then there are the sporting papers, the radio papers, the children’s comics, the
various snippet papers such as TIT-BITS, the large range of papers devoted to the movies and all more or less
exploiting women’s legs, the various trade papers, the women’s story-papers (the ORACLE, SECRETS, PEG’S PAPER, etc.
etc.), the needlework papers — these so numerous that a display of them alone will often fill an entire window — and in
addition the long series of ‘Yank Mags’ (FIGHT STORIES, ACTION STORIES, WESTERN SHORT STORIES, etc.), which are
imported shop-soiled from America and sold at twopence halfpenny or threepence. And the periodical proper shades off
into the fourpenny novelette, the ALDINE BOXING NOVELS, the BOYS’ FRIEND LIBRARY, the SCHOOLGIRLS’ OWN LIBRARY and many
others.
Probably the contents of these shops is the best available indication of what the mass of the English people really
feels and thinks. Certainly nothing half so revealing exists in documentary form. Best-seller novels, for instance,
tell one a great deal, but the novel is aimed almost exclusively at people above the £4-a-week level. The movies are
probably a very unsafe guide to popular taste, because the film industry is virtually a monopoly, which means that it
is not obliged to study its public at all closely. The same applies to some extent to the daily papers, and most of all
to the radio. But it does not apply to the weekly paper with a smallish circulation and specialized subject-matter.
Papers like the EXCHANGE AND MART, for instance, or CAGE-BIRDS, or the ORACLE, or the PREDICTION, or the MATRIMONIAL
TIMES, only exist because there is a definite demand for them, and they reflect the minds of their readers as a great
national daily with a circulation of millions cannot possibly do.
Here I am only dealing with a single series of papers, the boys’ twopenny weeklies, often inaccurately described as
‘penny dreadfuls’. Falling strictly within this class there are at present ten papers, the GEM, MAGNET, MODERN BOY,
TRIUMPH and CHAMPION, all owned by the Amalgamated Press, and the WIZARD, ROVER, SKIPPER, HOTSPUR and ADVENTURE, all
owned by D. C. Thomson & Co. What the circulations of these papers are, I do not know. The editors and proprietors
refuse to name any figures, and in any case the circulation of a paper carrying serial stories is bound to fluctuate
widely. But there is no question that the combined public of the ten papers is a very large one. They are on sale in
every town in England, and nearly every boy who reads at all goes through a phase of reading one or more of them. The
GEM and MAGNET, which are much the oldest of these papers, are of rather different type from the rest, and they have
evidently lost some of their popularity during the past few years. A good many boys now regard them as old fashioned
and ‘slow’. Nevertheless I want to discuss them first, because they are more interesting psychologically than the
others, and also because the mere survival of such papers into the nineteen-thirties is a rather startling
phenomenom.
The GEM and MAGNET are sister-papers (characters out of one paper frequently appear in the other), and were both
started more than thirty years ago. At that time, together with Chums and the old B[oy’s] O[wn] P[aper], they were the
leading papers for boys, and they remained dominant till quite recently. Each of them carries every week a fifteen — or
twenty-thousand-word school story, complete in itself, but usually more or less connected with the story of the week
before. The Gem in addition to its school story carries one or more adventure serial. Otherwise the two papers are so
much alike that they can be treated as one, though the MAGNET has always been the better known of the two, probably
because it possesses a really first-rate character in the fat boy. Billy Bunter.
The stories are stories of what purports to be public-school life, and the schools (Greyfriars in the MAGNET and St
Jim’s in the GEM) are represented as ancient and fashionable foundations of the type of Eton or Winchester. All the
leading characters are fourth-form boys aged fourteen or fifteen, older or younger boys only appearing in very minor
parts. Like Sexton Blake and Nelson Lee, these boys continue week after week and year after year, never growing any
older. Very occasionally a new boy arrives or a minor character drops out, but in at any rate the last twenty-five
years the personnel has barely altered. All the principal characters in both papers — Bob Cherry, Tom Merry, Harry
Wharton, Johnny Bull, Billy Bunter and the rest of them — were at Greyfriars or St Jim’s long before the Great War,
exactly the same age as at present, having much the same kind of adventures and talking almost exactly the same
dialect. And not only the characters but the whole atmosphere of both Gem and Magnet has been preserved unchanged,
partly by means of very elaborate stylization. The stories in the Magnet are signed ‘Frank Richards’ and those in the
GEM, ‘Martin Clifford’, but a series lasting thirty years could hardly be the work of the same person every week.
Consequently they have to be written in a style that is easily imitated — an extraordinary, artificial, repetitive
style, quite different from anything else now existing in English literature. A couple of extracts will do as
illustrations. Here is one from the MAGNET:
Groan!
‘Shutup, Bunter!’
Groan!
Shutting up was not really in Billy Bunter’s line. He seldom shut up, though often requested to do so. On the
present awful occasion the fat Owl of Greyfriars was less inclined than ever to shut up. And he did not shut up! He
groaned, and groaned, and went on groaning.
Even groaning did not fully express Bunter’s feelings. His feelings, in fact, were inexpressible.
There were six of them in the soup! Only one of the six uttered sounds of woe and lamentation. But that one, William
George Bunter, uttered enough for the whole party and a little over.
Harry Wharton & Co. stood in a wrathy and worried group. They were landed and stranded, diddled, dished and
done! etc., etc., etc.
Here is one from the Gem:
‘Oh cwumbs!’
‘Oh gum!’
‘Oooogh!’
‘Urrggh!’
Arthur Augustus sat up dizzily. He grabbed his handkerchief and pressed it to his damaged nose. Tom Merry sat up,
gasping for breath. They looked at one another.
‘Bai Jove! This is a go, deah boy!’ gurgled Arthur Augustus. ‘I have been thwown into quite a fluttah! Oogh! The
wottahs! The wuffians! The feahful outsidahs! Wow!’ etc., etc., etc.
Both of these extracts are entirely typical: you would find something like them in almost every chapter of every
number, to-day or twenty-five years ago. The first thing that anyone would notice is the extraordinary amount of
tautology (the first of these two passages contains a hundred and twenty-five words and could be compressed into about
thirty), seemingly designed to spin out the story, but actually playing its part in creating the atmosphere. For the
same reason various facetious expressions are repeated over and over again; ‘wrathy’, for instance, is a great
favourite, and so is ‘diddled, dished and done’. ‘Oooogh!’, ‘Grooo!’ and ‘Yaroo!’ (stylized cries of pain) recur
constantly, and so does ‘Ha! ha! ha!’, always given a line to itself, so that sometimes a quarter of a column or
there-abouts consists of ‘Ha! ha! ha!’ The slang (‘Go and cat coke!’, ‘What the thump!’, ‘You frabjous ass!’, etc.
etc.) has never been altered, so that the boys are now using slang which is at least thirty years out of date. In
addition, the various nicknames are rubbed in on every possible occasion. Every few lines we are reminded that Harry
Wharton & Co. are ‘the Famous Five’, Bunter is always ‘the fat Owl’ or ‘the Owl of the Remove’, Vernon-Smith is
always ‘the Bounder of Greyfriars’, Gussy (the Honourable Arthur Augustus D’Arcy) is always ‘the swell of St Jim’s’,
and so on and so forth. There is a constant, untiring effort to keep the atmosphere intact and to make sure that every
new reader learns immediately who is who. The result has been to make Greyfriars and St Jim’s into an extraordinary
little world of their own, a world which cannot be taken seriously by anyone over fifteen, but which at any rate is not
easily forgotten. By a debasement of the Dickens technique a series of stereotyped ‘characters’ has been built up, in
several cases very successfully. Billy Bunter, for instance, must be one of the best-known figures in English fiction;
for the mere number of people who know him he ranks with Sexton Blake, Tarzan, Sherlock Holmes and a handful of
characters in Dickens.
Needless to say, these stories are fantastically unlike life at a real public school. They run in cycles of rather
differing types, but in general they are the clean-fun, knock-about type of story, with interest centring round
horseplay, practical jokes, ragging roasters, fights, canings, football, cricket and food. A constantly recurring story
is one in which a boy is accused of some misdeed committed by another and is too much of a sportsman to reveal the
truth. The ‘good’ boys are ‘good’ in the clean-living Englishman tradition — they keep in hard training, wash behind
their ears, never hit below the belt etc., etc. — and by way of contrast there is a series of’bad’ boys, Racke, Crooke,
Loder and others, whose badness consists in betting, smoking cigarettes and frequenting public-houses. All these boys
are constantly on the verge of expulsion, but as it would mean a change of personnel if any boy were actually expelled,
no one is ever caught out in any really serious offence. Stealing, for instance, barely enters as a motif. Sex is
completely taboo, especially in the form in which it actually arises at public schools. Occasionally girls enter into
the stories, and very rarely there is something approaching a mild flirtation, but it is entirely in the spirit of
clean fun. A boy and a girl enjoy going for bicycle rides together — that is all it ever amounts to. Kissing, for
instance, would be regarded as ‘soppy’. Even the bad boys are presumed to be completely sexless. When the GEM and
MAGNET were started, it is probable that there was a deliberate intention to get away from the guilty sex-ridden
atmosphere that pervaded so much of the earlier literature for boys. In the nineties the BOYS’ OWN PAPER, for instance,
used to have its correspondence columns full of terrifying warnings against masturbation, and books like ST WINIFRED’S
and TOM BROWN’S SCHOOL-DAYS were heavy with homosexual feeling, though no doubt the authors were not fully aware of it.
In the GEM and MAGNET sex simply does not exist as a problem. Religion is also taboo; in the whole thirty years’ issue
of the two papers the word ‘God’ probably does not occur, except in ‘God save the King’. On the other hand, there has
always been a very strong ‘temperance’ strain. Drinking and, by association, smoking are regarded as rather disgraceful
even in an adult (‘shady’ is the usual word), but at the same time as something irresistibly fascinating, a sort of
substitute for sex. In their moral atmosphere the GEM and MAGNET have a great deal in common with the Boy Scout
movement, which started at about the same time.
All literature of this kind is partly plagiarism. Sexton Blake, for instance, started off quite frankly as an
imitation of Sherlock Holmes, and still resembles him fairly strongly; he has hawk-like features, lives in Baker
Street, smokes enormously and puts on a dressing-gown when he wants to think. The GEM and MAGNET probably owe something
to the old school-story writers who were flourishing when they began, Gunby Hadath, Desmond Coke and the rest, but they
owe more to nineteenth-century models. In so far as Greyfriars and St Jim’s are like real schools at all, they are much
more like Tom Brown’s Rugby than a modern public school. Neither school has an O.T.G., for instance, games are not
compulsory, and the boys are even allowed to wear what clothes they like. But without doubt the main origin of these
papers is STALKY & CO. This book has had an immense influence on boys’ literature, and it is one of those books
which have a sort of traditional reputation among people who have never even seen a copy of it. More than once in boys’
weekly papers I have come across a reference to STALKY & CO. in which the word was spelt ‘Storky’. Even the name of
the chief comic among the Greyfriars masters, Mr Prout, is taken from STALKY & CO., and so is much of the slang;
‘jape’, ‘merry’,‘giddy’, ‘bizney’ (business), ‘frabjous’, ‘don’t’ for ‘doesn’t’— all of them out of date even when GEM
and MAGNET started. There are also traces of earlier origins. The name ‘Greyfriars’ is probably taken from Thackeray,
and Gosling, the school porter in the MAGNET, talks in an imitation of Dickens’s dialect.
With all this, the supposed ‘glamour’ of public-school life is played for all it is worth. There is all the usual
para-phernalia — lock-up, roll-call, house matches, fagging, prefects, cosy teas round the study fire, etc. etc. — and
constant reference to the ‘old school’, the ‘old grey stones’ (both schools were founded in the early sixteenth
century), the ‘team spirit’ of the ‘Greyfriars men’. As for the snob-appeal, it is completely shameless. Each school
has a titled boy or two whose titles are constantly thrust in the reader’s face; other boys have the names of
well-known aristocratic families, Talbot, Manners, Lowther. We are for ever being reminded that Gussy is the Honourable
Arthur A. D’Arcy, son of Lord Eastwood, that Jack Blake is heir to ‘broad acres’, that Hurree Jamset Ram Singh
(nicknamed Inky) is the Nabob of Bhanipur, that Vernon-Smith’s father is a millionaire. Till recently the illustrations
in both papers always depicted the boys in clothes imitated from those of Eton; in the last few years Greyfriars has
changed over to blazers and flannel trousers, but St Jim’s still sticks to the Eton jacket, and Gussy sticks to his
top-hat. In the school magazine which appears every week as part of the MAGNET, Harry Wharton writes an article
discussing the pocket-money received by the ‘fellows in the Remove’, and reveals that some of them get as much as five
pounds a week! This kind of thing is a perfectly deliberate incitement to wealth-fantasy. And here it is worth noticing
a rather curious fact, and that is that the school story is a thing peculiar to England. So far as I know, there are
extremely few school stories in foreign languages. The reason, obviously, is that in England education is mainly a
matter of status. The most definite dividing line between the petite-bourgeoisie and the working class is that the
former pay for their education, and within the bourgeoisie there is another unbridgeable gulf between the ‘public’
school and the ‘private’ school. It is quite clear that there are tens and scores of thousands of people to whom every
detail of life at a ‘posh’ public school is wildly thrilling and romantic. They happen to be outside that mystic world
of quad-rangles and house-colours, but they can yearn after it, day-dream about it, live mentally in it for hours at a
stretch. The question is, Who arc these people? Who reads the GEM and MAGNET?
Obviously one can never be quite certain about this kind of thing. All I can say from my own observation is this.
Boys who are likely to go to public schools themselves generally read the GEM and MAGNET, but they nearly always stop
reading them when they are about twelve; they may continue for another year from force of habit, but by that time they
have ceased to take them seriously. On the other hand, the boys at very cheap private schools, the schools that are
designed for people who can’t afford a public school but consider the Council schools ‘common’, continue reading the
GEM and MAGNET for several years longer. A few years ago I was a teacher at two of these schools myself. I found that
not only did virtually all the boys read the GEM and MAGNET, but that they were still taking them fairly seriously when
they were fifteen or even sixteen. These boys were the sons of shopkeepers, office employees and small business and
professional men, and obviously it is this class that the GEM and MAGNET are aimed at. But they are certainly read by
working-class boys as well. They are generally on sale in the poorest quarters of big towns, and I have known them to
be read by boys whom one might expect to be completely immune from public-school ‘glamour’. I have seen a young coal
miner, for instance, a lad who had already worked a year or two underground, eagerly reading the GEM. Recently I
offered a batch of English papers to some British legionaries of the French Foreign Legion in North Africa; they picked
out the GEM and MAGNET first. Both papers are much read by girls, and the Pen Pals department of the GEM shows that it
is read in every corner of the British Empire, by Australians, Canadians, Palestine Jews, Malays, Arabs, Straits
Chinese, etc., etc. The editors evidently expect their readers to be aged round about fourteen, and the advertisements
(milk chocolate, postage stamps, water pistols, blushing cured, home conjuring tricks, itching powder, the Phine Phun
Ring which runs a needle into your friend’s hand, etc., etc.) indicate roughly the same age; there are also the
Admiralty advertisements, however, which call for youths between seventeen and twenty-two. And there is no question
that these papers are also read by adults. It is quite common for people to write to the editor and say that they have
read every number of the GEM or MAGNET for the past thirty years. Here, for instance, is a letter from a lady in
Salisbury:
I can say of your splendid yarns of Harry Wharton & Co. of Greyfriars, that they never fail to reach a high
standard. Without doubt they are the finest stories of their type on the market to-day, which is saying a good deal.
They seem to bring you face to face with Nature. I have taken the Magnet from the start, and have followed the
adventures of Harry Wharton & Co. with rapt interest. I have no sons, but two daughters, and there’s always a rush
to be the first to read the grand old paper. My husband, too, was a staunch reader of the Magnet until he was suddenly
taken away from us.
It is well worth getting hold of some copies of the GEM and MAGNET, especially the GEM, simply to have a look at the
correspondence columns. What is truly startling is the intense interest with which the pettiest details of life at
Greyfriars and St Jim’s are followed up. Here, for instance, are a few of the questions sent in by readers:
What age is Dick Roylance?’ ‘How old is St Jim’s?’ ‘Can you give me a list of the Shell and their studies?’ ‘How
much did D’Arcy’s monocle cost?’ ‘How is it that fellows like Crooke are in the Shell and decent fellows like yourself
are only in the Fourth?’ ‘What arc the Form captain’s three chief duties?’ ‘Who is the chemistry master at St Jim’s?’
(From a girl) ‘Where is St Jim’s situated? COULD you tell me how to get there, as I would love to sec the building? Are
you boys just “phoneys”, as I think you are?’
It is clear that many of the boys and girls who write these letters are living a complete fantasy-life. Sometimes a
boy will write, for instance, giving his age, height, weight, chest and bicep measurements and asking which member of
the Shell or Fourth Form he most exactly resembles. The demand for a list of the studies on the Shell passage, with an
exact account of who lives in each, is a very common one. The editors, of course, do everything in their power to keep
up the illusion. In the GEM Jack Blake is supposed to write answers to correspondents, and in the MAGNET a couple of
pages is always given up to the school magazine (the GREYFRIARS HERALD, edited by Harry Wharton), and there is another
page in which one or other character is written up each week. The stories run in cycles, two or three characters being
kept in the foreground for several weeks at a time. First there will be a series of rollicking adventure stories,
featuring the Famous Five and Billy Bunter; then a run of stories turning on mistaken identity, with Wibley (the
make-up wizard) in the star part; then a run of more serious stories in which Vernon-Smith is trembling on the verge of
expulsion. And here one comes upon the real secret of the GEM and MAGNET and the probable reason why they continue to
be read in spite of their obvious out-of-dateness.
It is that the characters are so carefully graded as to give almost every type of reader a character he can identify
himself with. Most boys’ papers aim at doing this, hence the boy-assistant (Sexton Blake’s Tinker, Nelson Lee’s Nipper,
etc.) who usually accompanies the explorer, detective or what-not on his adventures. But in these cases there is only
one boy, and usually it is much the same type of boy. In the GEM and MAGNET there is a model for very nearly everybody.
There is the normal athletic, high-spirited boy (Tom Merry, Jack Blake, Frank Nugent), a slightly rowdier version of
this type (Bob Cherry), a more aristocratic version (Talbot, Manners), a quieter, more serious version (Harry Wharton),
and a stolid, ‘bulldog’ version (Johnny Bull). Then there is the reckless, dare-devil type of boy (Vernon-Smith), the
definitely ‘clever’, studious boy (Mark Linley, Dick Penfold), and the eccentric boy who is not good at games but
possesses some special talent (Skinner Wibley). And there is the scholarship-boy (Tom Redwing), an important figure in
this class of story because he makes it possible for boys from very poor homes to project themselves into the
public-school atmosphere. In addition there are Australian, Irish, Welsh, Manx, Yorkshire and Lancashire boys to play
upon local patriotism. But the subtlety of characterization goes deeper than this. If one studies the correspondence
columns one sees that there is probably NO character in the GEM and MAGNET whom some or other reader does not identify
with, except the out-and-out comics, Coker, Billy Bunter, Fisher T. Fish (the money-grabbing American boy) and, of
course, the masters. Bunter, though in his origin he probably owed something to the fat boy in PICKWICK, is a real
creation. His tight trousers against which boots and canes are constantly thudding, his astuteness in search of food,
his postal order which never turns up, have made him famous wherever the Union Jack waves. But he is not a subject for
day-dreams. On the other hand, another seeming figure of fun, Gussy (the Honourable Arthur A. D’Arcy, ‘the swell of St
Jim’s’), is evidently much admired. Like everything else in the GEM and MAGNET, Gussy is at least thirty years out of
date. He is the ‘knut’ of the early twentieth century or even the ‘masher’ of the nineties (‘Bai Jove, deah boy!’ and
‘Weally, I shall be obliged to give you a feahful thwashin’!’), the monocled idiot who made good on the fields of Mons
and Le Gateau. And his evident popularity goes to show how deep the snob-appeal of this type is. English people are
extremely fond of the titled ass (cf. Lord Peter Wimsey) who always turns up trumps in the moment of emergency. Here is
a letter from one of Gussy’s girl admirers;
I think you’re too hard on Gussy. I wonder he’s still In existence, the way you treat him. He’s my hero. Did you
know I write lyrics? How’s this — to the tune of’Goody Goody’?
Gonna get my gas-mask, join the ARP.
’Cos I’m wise to all those bombs you drop on me.
Gonna dig myself a trench Inside the garden fence;
Gonna seal my windows up with tin
So the tear gas can’t get in;
Gonna park my cannon right outside the kerb
With a note to Adolf Hitler: ‘Don’t disturb!’
And if I never fall in Nazi hands
That’s soon enough for me
Gonna get my gas-mask, join the ARP.
P.S. — Do you get on well with girls?
I quote this in full because (dated April 1939) it is interesting as being probably the earliest mention of Hitler
in the GEM. In the GEM there is also a heroic fat boy. Fatty Wynn, as a set-off against Bunter. Vernon-Smith, ‘the
Bounder of the Remove’, a Byronic character, always on the verge of the sack, is another great favourite. And even some
of the cads probably have their following. Loder, for instance, ‘the rotter of the Sixth’, is a cad, but he is also a
highbrow and given to saying sarcastic things about football and the team spirit. The boys of the Remove only think him
all the more of a cad for this, but a certain type of boy would probably identify with him. Even Racke, Crooke &
Co. are probably admired by small boys who think it diabolically wicked to smoke cigarettes. (A frequent question in
the correspondence column; ‘What brand of cigarettes does Racke smoke?’)
Naturally the politics of the GEM and MAGNET are Conservative, but in a completely pre-1914 style, with no Fascist
tinge. In reality their basic political assumptions are two: nothing ever changes, and foreigners are funny. In the GEM
of 1939 Frenchmen are still Froggies and Italians are still Dagoes. Mossoo, the French master at Greyfriars, is the
usual comic-paper Frog, with pointed beard, pegtop trousers, etc. Inky, the Indian boy, though a rajah, and therefore
possessing snob-appeal, is also the comic babu of the PUNCH tradition. (“The rowfulness is not the proper caper, my
esteemed Bob,” said Inky. “Let dogs delight in the barkfulness and bitefulness, but the soft answer is the cracked
pitcher that goes longest to a bird in the bush, as the English proverb remarks.”) Fisher T. Fish is the old-style
stage Yankee (“Waal, I guess”, etc.) dating from a period of Anglo-American jealousy. Wun Lung, the Chinese boy (he has
rather faded out of late, no doubt because some of the MAGNET’S readers are Straits Chinese), is the nineteenth-century
pantomime Chinaman, with saucer-shaped hat, pigtail and pidgin-English. The assumption all along is not only that
foreigners are comics who are put there for us to laugh at, but that they can be classified in much the same way as
insects. That is why in all boys’ papers, not only the GEM and MAGNET, a Chinese is invariably portrayed with a
pigtail. It is the thing you recognize him by, like the Frenchman’s beard or the Italian’s barrel-organ. In papers of
this kind it occasionally happens that when the setting of a story is in a foreign country some attempt is made to
describe the natives as individual human beings, but as a rule it is assumed that foreigners of any one race are all
alike and will conform more or less exactly to the following patterns:
FRENCHMAN: Excitable. Wears beard, gesticulates wildly. SPANIARD, Mexican, etc.: Sinister, treacherous. ARAB,
Afghan, etc.: Sinister, treacherous. CHINESE: Sinister, treacherous. Wears pigtail. ITALIAN: Excitable. Grinds
barrel-organ or carries stiletto. SWEDE, Dane, etc.: Kind-hearted, stupid. NEGRO: Comic, very faithful.
The working classes only enter into the GEM and MAGNET as comics or semi-villains (race-course touts, etc.). As for
class-friction, trade unionism, strikes, slumps, unemployment, Fascism and civil war — not a mention. Somewhere or
other in the thirty years’ issue of the two papers you might perhaps find the word ‘Socialism’, but you would have to
look a long time for it. If the Russian Revolution is anywhere referred to, it will be indirectly, in the word ‘Bolshy’
(meaning a person of violent disagreeable habits). Hitler and the Nazis are just beginning to make their appearance, in
the sort of reference I quoted above. The war-crisis of September 1938 made just enough impression to produce a story
in which Mr Vernon-Smith, the Bounder’s millionaire father, cashed in on the general panic by buying up country houses
in order to sell them to ‘crisis scuttlers’. But that is probably as near to noticing the European situation as the GEM
and MAGNET will come, until the war actually starts. That does not mean that these papers are unpatriotic — quite the
contrary! Throughout the Great War the GEM and MAGNET were perhaps the most consistently and cheerfully patriotic
papers in England. Almost every week the boys caught a spy or pushed a conchy into the army, and during the rationing
period ‘EAT LESS BREAD’ was printed in large type on every page. But their patriotism has nothing whatever to do with
power-politics or ‘ideological’ warfare. It is more akin to family loyalty, and actually it gives one a valuable clue
to the attitude of ordinary people, especially the huge untouched block of the middle class and the better-off working
class. These people are patriotic to the middle of their bones, but they do not feel that what happens in foreign
countries is any of their business. When England is in danger they rally to its defence as a matter of course, but in
between-times they are not interested. After all, England is always in the right and England always wins, so why worry?
It is an attitude that has been shaken during the past twenty years, but not so deeply as is sometimes supposed.
Failure to understand it is one of the reasons why Left Wing political parties are seldom able to produce an acceptable
foreign policy.
The mental world of the GEM and MAGNET, therefore, is something like this:
The year is 1910 — or 1940, but it is all the same. You are at Greyfriars, a rosy-cheeked boy of fourteen in posh
tailor-made clothes, sitting down to tea in your study on the Remove passage after an exciting game of football which
was won by an odd goal in the last half-minute. There is a cosy fire in the study, and outside the wind is whistling.
The ivy clusters thickly round the old grey stones. The King is on his throne and the pound is worth a pound. Over in
Europe the comic foreigners are jabbering and gesticulating, but the grim grey battleships of the British Fleet are
steaming up the Channel and at the outposts of Empire the monocled Englishmen are holding the niggers at bay. Lord
Mauleverer has just got another fiver and we are all settling down to a tremendous tea of sausages, sardines, crumpets,
potted meat, jam and doughnuts. After tea we shall sit round the study fire having a good laugh at Billy Bunter and
discussing the team for next week’s match against Rook-wood. Everything is safe, solid and unquestionable. Everything
will be the same for ever and ever. That approximately is the atmosphere.
But now turn from the GEM and MAGNET to the more up-to-date papers which have appeared since the Great War. The
truly significant thing is that they have more points of resemblance to the GEM and MAGNET than points of difference.
But it is better to consider the differences first.
There are eight of these newer papers, the MODEM BOY, TRIUMPH, CHAMPION, WIZARD, ROVER, SKIPPER, HOTSPUR and
ADVENTURE. All of these have appeared since the Great War, but except for the MODERN BOY none of them is less than five
years old. Two papers which ought also to be mentioned briefly here; though they are not strictly in the same class as
the rest, are the DETECTIVE WEEKLY and the THRILLER, both owned by the Amalgamated Press. The DETECTIVE WEEKLY has
taken over Sexton Blake. Both of these papers admit a certain amount of sex-interest into their stories, and though
certainly read by boys; they are not aimed at them exclusively. All the others are boys’ papers pure and simple, and
they are sufficiently alike to be considered together. There does not seem to be any notable difference between
Thomson’s publications and those of the Amalgamated Press.
As soon as one looks at these papers one sees their technical superiority to the GEM and MAGNET. To begin with, they
have the great advantage of not being written entirely by one person. Instead of one long complete story, a number of
the WIZARD or HOTSPUR consists of half a dozen or more serials, none of which goes on for ever. Consequently there is
far more variety and far less padding, and none of the tiresome stylization and facetiousness of the GEM and MAGNET.
Look at these two extracts, for example:
Billy Bunter groaned.
A quarter of an hour had elapsed out of the two hours that Bunter was booked for extra French.
In a quarter of an hour there were only fifteen minutes! But every one of those minutes seemed inordinately long to
Bunter. They seemed to crawl by like tired snails.
Looking at the clock in Classroom No. 10 the fat Owl could hardly believe that only fifteen minutes had passed. It
seemed more like fifteen hours, if not fifteen days!
Other fellows were in extra French as well as Bunter. They did not matter. Bunter did! (The Magnet)
* * *
After a terrible climb, hacking out handholds in the smooth ice every step of the way up. Sergeant Lionheart Logan
of the Mounties was now clinging like a human fly to the face of an icy cliff, as smooth and treacherous as a giant
pane of glass.
An Arctic blizzard, in all its fury, was buffeting his body, driving the blinding snow into his face, seeking to
tear his fingers loose from their handholds and dash him to death on the jagged boulders which lay at the foot of the
cliff a hundred feet below.
Crouching among those boulders were eleven villainous trappers who had done their best to shoot down Lionheart and
his companion, Constable Jim Rogers — until the blizzard had blotted the two Mounties out of sight from below. (The
Wizard)
The second extract gets you some distance with the story, the first takes a hundred words to tell you that Bunter is
in the detention class. Moreover, by not concentrating on school stories (in point of numbers the school story slightly
predominates in all these papers, except the THRILLER and DETECTIVE WEEKLY), the WIZARD, HOTSPUR, etc., have far
greater opportunities for sensationalism. Merely looking at the cover illustrations of the papers which I have on the
table in front of me, here are some of the things I see. On one a cowboy is clinging by his toes to the wing of an
aeroplane in mid-air and shooting down another aeroplane with his revolver. On another a Chinese is swimming for his
life down a sewer with a swarm of ravenous-looking rats swimming after him. On another an engineer is lighting a stick
of dynamite while a steel robot feels for him with its claws. On another a man in airman’s costume is fighting
barehanded against a rat somewhat larger than a donkey. On another a nearly naked man of terrific muscular development
has just seized a lion by the tail and flung it thirty yards over the wall of an arena, with the words, ‘Take back your
blooming lion!’ Clearly no school story can compete with this kind of thing. From time to time the school buildings may
catch fire or the French master may turn out to be the head of an international anarchist gang, but in a general way
the interest must centre round cricket, school rivalries, practical jokes, etc. There is not much room for bombs,
death-rays, sub-machine guns, aeroplanes, mustangs, octopuses, grizzly bears or gangsters.
Examination of a large number of these papers shows that, putting aside school stories, the favourite subjects are
Wild West, Frozen North, Foreign Legion, crime (always from the detective’s angle), the Great War (Air Force or Secret
Service, not the infantry), the Tarzan motif in varying forms, professional football, tropical exploration, historical
romance (Robin Hood, Cavaliers and Round-heads, etc.) and scientific invention. The Wild West still leads, at any rate
as a setting, though the Red Indian seems to be fading out. The one theme that is really new is the scientific one.
Death-rays, Martians, invisible men, robots, helicopters and interplanetary rockets figure largely: here and there
there are even far-off rumours of psychotherapy and ductless glands. Whereas the GEM and MAGNET derive from Dickens and
Kipling, the WIZARD, CHAMPION, MODEM BOY, etc., owe a great deal to H. G. Wells, who, rather than Jules Verne, is the
father of ‘Scientifiction’. Naturally it is the magical Martian aspect of science that is most exploited, but one or
two papers include serious articles on scientific subjects, besides quantities of informative snippets. (Examples: ‘A
Kauri tree in Queensland, Australia, is over 12,000 years old’; ‘Nearly 50,000 thunderstorms occur every day’; ‘Helium
gas costs £1 per 1000 cubic feet’; ‘There are over 500 varieties of spiders in Great Britain’; ‘London firemen use
14,000,000 gallons of water annually’, etc., etc.) There is a marked advance in intellectual curiosity and, on the
whole, in the demand made on the reader’s attention. In practice the GEM and MAGNET and the post-war papers are read by
much the same public, but the mental age aimed at seems to have risen by a year or two years — an improvement probably
corresponding to the improvement in elementary education since 1909.
The other thing that has emerged in the post-war boys’ papers, though not to anything like the extent one would
expect, is bully-worship and the cult of violence.
If one compares the GEM and MAGNET with a genuinely modern paper, the thing that immediately strikes one is the
absence of the leader-principle. There is no central dominating character; instead there are fifteen or twenty
characters, all more or less on an equality, with whom readers of different types can identify. In the more modem
papers this is not usually the case. Instead of identifying with a schoolboy of more or less his own age, the reader of
the SKIPPER, HOTSPUR, etc., is led to identify with a G-man, with a Foreign Legionary, with some variant of Tarzan,
with an air ace, a master spy, an explorer, a pugilist — at any rate with some single all-powerful character who
dominates everyone about him and whose usual method of solving any problem is a sock on the jaw. This character is
intended as a superman, and as physical strength is the form of power that boys can best understand, he is usually a
sort of human gorilla; in the Tarzan type of story he is sometimes actually a giant, eight or ten feet high. At the
same time the scenes of violence in nearly all these stories are remarkably harmless and unconvincing. There is a great
difference in tone between even the most bloodthirsty English paper and the threepenny Yank Mags, FIGHT STORIES, ACTION
STORIES, etc. (not strictly boys’ papers, but largely read by boys). In the Yank Mags you get real blood-lust, really
gory descriptions of the all-in, jump-on-his-testicles style fighting, written in a jargon that has been perfected by
people who brood end-lessly on violence. A paper like FIGHT STORIES, for instance, would have very little appeal except
to sadists and masochists. You can see the comparative gentleness of the English civilization by the amateurish way in
which prize-fighting is always described in the boys’ weeklies. There is no specialized vocabulary. Look at these four
extracts, two English, two American;
When the gong sounded, both men were breathing heavily and each had great red marks on his chest. Bill’s chin was
bleeding, and Ben had a cut over his right eye.
Into their corners they sank, but when the gong clanged again they were up swiftly, and they went like tigers at
each other. (ROVER)
* * *
He walked in stolidly and smashed a clublike right to my face. Blood spattered and I went back on my heels, but
surged in and ripped my right under the heart. Another right smashed full on Ben’s already battered mouth, and,
spitting out the fragments of a tooth, he crashed a flailing left to my body. (FIGHT STORIES)
* * *
It was amazing to watch the Black Panther at work. His muscles rippled and slid under his dark skin. There was all
the power and grace of a giant cat in his swift and terrible onslaught.
He volleyed blows with a bewildering speed for so huge a fellow. In a moment Ben was simply blocking with his gloves
as well as he could. Ben was really a past-master of defence. He had many fine victories behind him. But the Negro’s
rights and lefts crashed through openings that hardly any other fighter could have found. (WIZARD)
* * *
Haymakers which packed the bludgeoning weight of forest monarchs crashing down under the ax hurled into the bodies
of the two heavies as they swapped punches. (FIGHT STORIES)
Notice how much more knowledgeable the American extracts sound. They are written for devotees of the prize-ring, the
others are not. Also, it ought to be emphasized that on its level the moral code of the English boys’ papers is a
decent one. Crime and dishonesty are never held up to admiration, there is none of the cynicism and corruption of the
American gangster story. The huge sale of the Yank Mags in England shows that there is a demand for that kind of thing,
but very few English writers seem able to produce it. When hatred of Hitler became a major emotion in America, it was
interesting to see how promptly ‘anti-Fascism’ was adapted to pornographic purposes by the editors of the Yank Mags.
One magazine which I have in front of me is given up to a long, complete story, ‘When Hell Game to America’, in which
the agents of a ‘blood-maddened European dictator’ are trying to conquer the U.S.A. with death-rays and invisible
aeroplanes. There is the frankest appeal to sadism, scenes in which the Nazis tie bombs to women’s backs and fling them
off heights to watch them blown to pieces in mid-air, others in which they tie naked girls together by their hair and
prod them with knives to make them dance, etc., etc. The editor comments solemnly on all this, and uses it as a plea
for tightening up restrictions against immigrants. On another page of the same paper: ‘LIVES OF THE HOTCHA CHORUS
GIRLS. Reveals all the intimate secrets and fascinating pastimes of the famous Broadway Hotcha girls. NOTHING IS
OMITTED. Price 10c.’ ‘HOW TO LOVE. 10c.’ ‘FRENCH PHOTO RING. 25c.’ ‘NAUGHTY NUDIES TRANSFERS. From the outside of the
glass you see a beautiful girl, innocently dressed. Turn it around and look through the glass and oh! what a
difference! Set of 3 transfers 25c.,’ etc., etc., etc. There is nothing at all like this in any English paper likely to
be read by boys. But the process of Americanization is going on all the same. The American ideal, the ‘he-man’, the
‘tough guy’, the gorilla who puts everything right by socking everybody on the jaw, now figures in probably a majority
of boys’ papers. In one serial now running in the SKIPPER he is always portrayed ominously enough, swinging a rubber
truncheon.
The development of the WIZARD, HOTSPUR, etc., as against the earlier boys’ papers, boils down to this: better
technique, more scientific interest, more bloodshed, more leader-worship. But, after all, it is the LACK of development
that is the really striking thing.
To begin with, there is no political development whatever. The world of the SKIPPER and the CHAMPION is still the
pre-1914 world of the MAGNET and the GEM. The Wild West story, for instance, with its cattle-rustlers, lynch-law and
other paraphernalia belonging to the eighties, is a curiously archaic thing. It is worth noticing that in papers of
this type it is always taken for granted that adventures only happen at the ends of the earth, in tropical forests, in
Arctic wastes, in African deserts, on Western prairies, in Chinese opium dens — everywhere in fact, except the places
where things really DO happen. That is a belief dating from thirty or forty years ago, when the new continents were in
process of being opened up. Nowadays, of course, if you really want adventure, the place to look for it is in Europe.
But apart from the picturesque side of the Great War, contemporary history is carefully excluded. And except that
Americans are now admired instead of being laughed at, foreigners are exactly the same figures of fun that they always
were. If a Chinese character appears, he is still the sinister pigtailed opium-smuggler of Sax Rohmer; no indication
that things have been happening in China since 1912 — no indication that a war is going on there, for instance. If a
Spaniard appears, he is still a ‘dago’ or ‘greaser’ who rolls cigarettes and stabs people in the back; no indication
that things have been happening in Spain. Hitler and the Nazis have not yet appeared, or are barely making their
appearance. There will be plenty about them in a little while, but it will be from a strictly patriotic angle (Britain
versus Germany), with the real meaning of the struggle kept out of sight as much as possible. As for the Russian
Revolution, it is extremely difficult to find any reference to it in any of these papers. When Russia is mentioned at
all it is usually in an information snippet (example: ‘There are 29,000 centenarians in the USSR.’), and any reference
to the Revolution is indirect and twenty years out of date. In one story in the ROVER, for instance, somebody has a
tame bear, and as it is a Russian bear, it is nicknamed Trotsky — obviously an echo of the 1917-23 period and not of
recent controversies. The clock has stopped at 1910. Britannia rules the waves, and no one has heard of slumps, booms,
unemployment, dictatorships, purges or concentration camps.
And in social outlook there is hardly any advance. The snobbishness is somewhat less open than in the GEM and
MAGNET— that is the most one can possibly say. To begin with, the school story, always partly dependent on snob-appeal,
is by no means eliminated. Every number of a boys’ paper includes at least one school story, these stories slightly
outnumbering the Wild Westerns. The very elaborate fantasy-life of the GEM and MAGNET is not imitated and there is more
emphasis on extraneous adventure, but the social atmosphere (old grey stones) is much the same. When a new school is
introduced at the beginning of a story we are often told in just those words that ‘it was a very posh school’. From
time to time a story appears which is ostensibly directed AGAINST snobbery. The scholarship-boy (cf. Tom Redwing in the
MAGNET) makes fairly frequent appearances, and what is essentially the same theme is sometimes presented in this form:
there is great rivalry between two schools, one of which considers itself more ‘posh’ than the other, and there are
fights, practical jokes, football matches, etc., always ending in the discomfiture of the snobs. If one glances very
superficially at some of these stories it is possible to imagine that a democratic spirit has crept into the boys’
weeklies, but when one looks more closely one sees that they merely reflect the bitter jealousies that exist within the
white-collar class. Their real function is to allow the boy who goes to a cheap private school (NOT a Council school)
to feel that his school is just as ‘posh’ in the sight of God as Winchester or Eton. The sentiment of school loyalty
(‘We’re better than the fellows down the road’), a thing almost unknown to the real working class, is still kept up. As
these stories are written by many different hands, they do, of course, vary a good deal in tone. Some are reasonably
free from snobbishness, in others money and pedigree are exploited even more shamelessly than in the GEM and MAGNET. In
one that I came across an actual MAJORITY of the boys mentioned were titled.
Where working-class characters appear, it is usually either as comics (jokes about tramps, convicts, etc.), or as
prize-fighters, acrobats, cowboys, professional footballers and Foreign Legionaries — in other words, as adventurers.
There is no facing of the facts about working-class life, or, indeed, about WORKING life of any description. Very
occasionally one may come across a realistic description of, say, work in a coal-mine, but in all probability it will
only be there as the background of some lurid adventure. In any case the central character is not likely to be a
coal-miner. Nearly all the time the boy who reads these papers — in nine cases out often a boy who is going to spend
his life working in a shop, in a factory or in some subordinate job in an office — is led to identify with people in
positions of command, above all with people who are never troubled by shortage of money. The Lord Peter Wimsey figure,
the seeming idiot who drawls and wears a monocle but is always to the fore in moments of danger, turns up over and over
again. (This character is a great favourite in Secret Service stories.) And, as usual, the heroic characters all have
to talk B.B.C.; they may talk Scottish or Irish or American, but no one in a star part is ever permitted to drop an
aitch. Here it is worth comparing the social atmosphere of the boys’ weeklies with that of the women’s weeklies, the
ORACLE, the FAMILY STAR, PEG’S PAPER, etc.
The women’s papers are aimed at an older public and are read for the most part by girls who are working for a
living. Consequently they are on the surface much more realistic. It is taken for granted, for example, that nearly
everyone has to live in a big town and work at a more or less dull job. Sex, so far from being taboo, is THE subject.
The short, complete stories, the special feature of these papers, are generally of the ‘came the dawn’ type: the
heroine narrowly escapes losing her ‘boy’ to a designing rival, or the ‘boy’ loses his job and has to postpone
marriage, but presently gets a better job. The changeling-fantasy (a girl brought up in a poor home is ‘really’ the
child of rich parents) is another favourite. Where sensationalism comes in, usually in the serials, it arises out of
the more domestic type of crime, such as bigamy, forgery or sometimes murder; no Martians, death-rays or international
anarchist gangs. These papers are at any rate aiming at credibility, and they have a link with real life in their
correspondence columns, where genuine problems are being discussed. Ruby M. Ayres’s column of advice in the ORACLE, for
instance, is extremely sensible and well written. And yet the world of the ORACLE and PEG’S PAPER is a pure
fantasy-world. It is the same fantasy all the time; pretending to be richer than you are. The chief impression that one
carries away from almost every story in these papers is of a frightful, overwhelming ‘refinement’. Ostensibly the
characters are working-class people, but their habits, the interiors of their houses, their clothes, their outlook and,
above all, their speech arc entirely middle class. They are all living at several pounds a week above their income. And
needless to say, that is just the impression that is intended. The idea is to give the bored factory-girl or worn-out
mother of five a dream-life in which she pictures herself — not actually as a duchess (that convention has gone out)
but as, say, the wife of a bank-manager. Not only is a five-to-six-pound-a-week standard of life set up as the ideal,
but it is tacitly assumed that that is how working-class people really DO live. The major facts arc simply not faced.
It is admitted, for instance, that people sometimes lose their jobs; but then the dark clouds roll away and they get
better jobs instead. No mention of un-employment as something permanent and inevitable, no mention of the dole, no
mention of trade unionism. No suggestion anywhere that there can be anything wrong with the system AS A SYSTEM; there
arc only individual misfortunes, which are generally due to somebody’s wickedness and can in any case be put right in
the last chapter. Always the dark clouds roll away, the kind employer raises Alfred’s wages, and there are jobs for
everybody except the drunks. It is still the world of the WIZARD and the GEM, except that there are orange-blossoms
instead of machine-guns.
The outlook inculcated by all these papers is that of a rather exceptionally stupid member of the Navy League in the
year 1910. Yes, it may be said, but what does it matter? And in any case, what else do you expect?
Of course no one in his senses would want to turn the so-called penny dreadful into a realistic novel or a Socialist
tract. An adventure story must of its nature be more or less remote from real life. But, as I have tried to make clear,
the unreality of the WIZARD and the GEM is not so artless as it looks. These papers exist because of a specialized
demand, because boys at certain ages find it necessary to read about Martians, death-rays, grizzly bears and gangsters.
They get what they are looking for, but they get it wrapped up in the illusions which their future employers think
suitable for them. To what extent people draw their ideas from fiction is disputable. Personally I believe that most
people are influenced far more than they would care to admit by novels, serial stories, films and so forth, and that
from this point of view the worst books are often the most important, because they are usually the ones that are read
earliest in life. It is probable that many people who would consider themselves extremely sophisticated and ‘advanced’
are actually carrying through life an imaginative background which they acquired in childhood from (for instance)
Sapper and Ian Hay. If that is so, the boys’ twopenny weeklies are of the deepest importance. Here is the stuff that is
read somewhere between the ages of twelve and eighteen by a very large proportion, perhaps an actual majority, of
English boys, including many who will never read anything else except newspapers; and along with it they are absorbing
a set of beliefs which would be regarded as hopelessly out of date in the Central Office of the Conservative Party. All
the better because it is done indirectly, there is being pumped into them the conviction that the major problems of our
time do not exist, that there is nothing wrong with LAISSEZ-FAIRE capitalism, that foreigners are un-important comics
and that the British Empire is a sort of charity-concern which will last for ever. Considering who owns these papers,
it is difficult to believe that this is un-intentional. Of the twelve papers I have been discussing (i.e. twelve
including the THRILLER and DETECTIVE WEEKLY) seven are the property of the Amalgamated Press, which is one of the
biggest press-combines in the world and controls more than a hundred different papers. The GEM and MAGNET, therefore,
are closely linked up with the DAILY TELEGRAPH and the FINANCIAL TIMES. This in itself would be enough to rouse certain
suspicions, even if it were not obvious that the stories in the boys’ weeklies are politically vetted. So it appears
that if you feel the need of a fantasy-life in which you travel to Mars and fight lions bare-handed (and what boy
doesn’t?), you can only have it by delivering yourself over, mentally, to people like Lord Camrose. For there is no
competition. Throughout the whole of this run of papers the differences are negligible, and on this level no others
exist. This raises the question, why is there no such thing as a left-wing boys’ paper?
At first glance such an idea merely makes one slightly sick. It is so horribly easy to imagine what a left-wing
boys’ paper would be like, if it existed. I remember in 1920 or 1921 some optimistic person handing round Communist
tracts among a crowd of public-school boys. The tract I received was of the question-and-answer kind:
Q,. ‘Can a Boy Communist be a Boy Scout, Comrade?’ A. ‘No, Comrade.’ Q,. ‘Why, Comrade?’ A. ‘Because, Comrade, a Boy
Scout must salute the Union Jack, which is the symbol of tyranny and oppression,’ etc., etc.
Now suppose that at this moment somebody started a left-wing paper deliberately aimed at boys of twelve or fourteen.
I do not suggest that the whole of its contents would be exactly like the tract I have quoted above, but does anyone
doubt that they would be SOMETHING like it? Inevitably such a paper would either consist of dreary up-lift or it would
be under Communist influence and given over to adulation of Soviet Russia; in either case no normal boy would ever look
at it. Highbrow literature apart, the whole of the existing left-wing Press, in so far as it is at all vigorously
‘left’, is one long tract. The one Socialist paper in England which could live a week on its merits AS A PAPER is the
DAILY HERALD: and how much Socialism is there in the DAILY HERALD? At this moment, therefore, a paper with a ‘left’
slant and at the same time likely to have an appeal to ordinary boys in their teens is something almost beyond hoping
for.
But it does not follow that it is impossible. There is no clear reason why every adventure story should necessarily
be mixed up with snobbishness and gutter patriotism. For, after all, the stories in the HOTSPUR and the MODERN BOY are
not Conservative tracts; they are merely adventure stories with a Conservative bias. It is fairly easy to imagine the
process being reversed. It is possible, for instance, to imagine a paper as thrilling and lively as the HOTSPUR, but
with subject-matter and ‘ideology’ a little more up to date. It is even possible (though this raises other
difficulties) to imagine a women’s paper at the same literary level as the ORACLE, dealing in approximately the same
kind of story, but taking rather more account of the realities of working-class life. Such things have been done
before, though not in England. In the last years of the Spanish monarchy there was a large output in Spain of left-wing
novelettes, some of them evidently of anarchist origin. Unfortunately at the time when they were appearing I did not
see their social significance, and I lost the collection of them that I had, but no doubt copies would still be
procurable. In get-up and style of story they were very similar to the English fourpenny novelette, except that their
inspiration was ‘left’. If, for instance, a story described police pursuing anarchists through the mountains, it would
be from the point of view of the anarchist and not of the police. An example nearer to hand is the Soviet film
CHAPAIEV, which has been shown a number of times in London. Technically, by the standards of the time when it was made,
CHAPAIEV is a first-rate film, but mentally, in spite of the unfamiliar Russian background, it is not so very remote
from Hollywood. The one thing that lifts it out of the ordinary is the remarkable performance by the actor who takes
the part of the White officer (the fat one)— a performance which looks very like an inspired piece of gagging.
Otherwise the atmosphere is familiar. All the usual paraphernalia is there — heroic fight against odds, escape at the
last moment, shots of galloping horses, love interest, comic relief. The film is in fact a fairly ordinary one, except
that its tendency is ‘left’. In a Hollywood film of the Russian Civil War the Whites would probably be angels and the
Reds demons. In the Russian version the Reds are angels and the Whites demons. That is also a lie, but, taking the long
view, it is a less pernicious lie than the other.
Here several difficult problems present themselves. Their general nature is obvious enough, and I do not want to
discuss them. I am merely pointing to the fact that, in England, popular imaginative literature is a field that
left-wing thought has never begun to enter. ALL fiction from the novels in the mushroom libraries downwards is censored
in the interests of the ruling class. And boys’ fiction above all, the blood-and-thunder stuff which nearly every boy
devours at some time or other, is sodden in the worst illusions of 1910. The fact is only unimportant if one believes
that what is read in childhood leaves no impression behind. Lord Camrose and his colleagues evidently believe nothing
of the kind, and, after all, Lord Camrose ought to know.
