It is Sunday afternoon, preferably before the war. The wife is already asleep in the armchair, and
the children have been sent out for a nice long walk. You put your feet up on the sofa, settle your spectacles on your
nose, and open the NEWS OF THE WORLD. Roast beef and Yorkshire, or roast pork and apple sauce, followed up by suet
pudding and driven home, as it were, by a cup of mahogany-brown tea, have put you in just the right mood. Your pipe is
drawing sweetly, the sofa cushions are soft underneath you, the fire is well alight, the air is warm and stagnant. In
these blissful circumstances, what is it that you want to read about?
Naturally, about a murder. But what kind of murder? If one examines the murders which have given the greatest amount
of pleasure to the British public, the murders whose story is known in its general outline to almost everyone and which
have been made into novels and re-hashed over and over again by the Sunday papers, one finds a fairly strong family
resemblance running through the greater number of them. Our great period in murder, our Elizabethan period, so to
speak, seems to have been between roughly 1850 and 1925, and the murderers whose reputation has stood the test of time
are the following: Dr. Palmer of Rugely, Jack the Ripper, Neill Cream, Mrs. Maybrick, Dr. Crippen, Seddon, Joseph
Smith, Armstrong, and Bywaters and Thompson. In addition, in 1919 or thereabouts, there was another very celebrated
case which fits into the general pattern but which I had better not mention by name, because the accused man was
acquitted.
Of the above-mentioned nine cases, at least four have had successful novels based on them, one has been made into a
popular melodrama, and the amount of literature surrounding them, in the form of newspaper write-ups, criminological
treatises and reminiscences by lawyers and police officers, would make a considerable library. It is difficult to
believe that any recent English crime will be remembered so long and so intimately, and not only because the violence
of external events has made murder seem unimportant, but because the prevalent type of crime seems to be changing. The
principal CAUSE CÉLÈBRE of the war years was the so-called Cleft Chin Murder, which has now been written up in a
popular booklet; the verbatim account of the trial was published some time last year by Messrs. Jarrolds with an
introduction by Mr. Bechhofer Roberts. Before returning to this pitiful and sordid case, which is only interesting from
a sociological and perhaps a legal point of view, let me try to define what it is that the readers of Sunday papers
mean when they say fretfully that “you never seem to get a good murder nowadays”.
In considering the nine murders I named above, one can start by excluding the Jack the Ripper case, which is in a
class by itself. Of the other eight, six were poisoning cases, and eight of the ten criminals belonged to the middle
class. In one way or another, sex was a powerful motive in all but two cases, and in at least four cases respectability
— the desire to gain a secure position in life, or not to forfeit one’s social position by some scandal such as a
divorce — was one of the main reasons for committing murder. In more than half the cases, the object was to get hold of
a certain known sum of money such as a legacy or an insurance policy, but the amount involved was nearly always small.
In most of the cases the crime only came to light slowly, as the result of careful investigations which started off
with the suspicions of neighbours or relatives; and in nearly every case there was some dramatic coincidence, in which
the finger of Providence could be clearly seen, or one of those episodes that no novelist would dare to make up, such
as Crippen’s flight across the Atlantic with his mistress dressed as a boy, or Joseph Smith playing “Nearer, my God, to
Thee” on the harmonium while one of his wives was drowning in the next room. The background of all these crimes, except
Neill Cream’s, was essentially domestic; of twelve victims, seven were either wife or husband of the murderer.
With all this in mind one can construct what would be, from a NEWS OF THE WORLD reader’s point of view, the
“perfect” murder. The murderer should be a little man of the professional class — a dentist or a solicitor, say —
living an intensely respectable life somewhere in the suburbs, and preferably in a semi-detached house, which will
allow the neighbours to hear suspicious sounds through the wall. He should be either chairman of the local Conservative
Party branch, or a leading Nonconformist and strong Temperance advocate. He should go astray through cherishing a
guilty passion for his secretary or the wife of a rival professional man, and should only bring himself to the point of
murder after long and terrible wrestles with his conscience. Having decided on murder, he should plan it all with the
utmost cunning, and only slip up over some tiny unforeseeable detail. The means chosen should, of course, be poison. In
the last analysis he should commit murder because this seems to him less disgraceful, and less damaging to his career,
than being detected in adultery. With this kind of background, a crime can have dramatic and even tragic qualities
which make it memorable and excite pity for both victim and murderer. Most of the crimes mentioned above have a touch
of this atmosphere, and in three cases, including the one I referred to but did not name, the story approximates to the
one I have outlined.
Now compare the Cleft Chin Murder. There is no depth of feeling in it. It was almost chance that the two people
concerned committed that particular murder, and it was only by good luck that they did not commit several others. The
background was not domesticity, but the anonymous life of the dance-halls and the false values of the American film.
The two culprits were an eighteen-year-old ex-waitress named Elizabeth Jones, and an American army deserter, posing as
an officer, named Karl Hulten. They were only together for six days, and it seems doubtful whether, until they were
arrested, they even learned one another’s true names. They met casually in a teashop, and that night went out for a
ride in a stolen army truck. Jones described herself as a strip-tease artist, which was not strictly true (she had
given one unsuccessful performance in this line); and declared that she wanted to do something dangerous, “like being a
gun-moll.” Hulten described himself as a big-time Chicago gangster, which was also untrue. They met a girl bicycling
along the road, and to show how tough he was Hulten ran over her with his truck, after which the pair robbed her of the
few shillings that were on her. On another occasion they knocked out a girl to whom they had offered a lift, took her
coat and handbag and threw her into a river. Finally, in the most wanton way, they murdered a taxi-driver who happened
to have £8 in his pocket. Soon afterwards they parted. Hulten was caught because he had foolishly kept the dead man’s
car, and Jones made spontaneous confessions to the police. In court each prisoner incriminated the other. In between
crimes, both of them seem to have behaved with the utmost callousness: they spent the dead taxi-driver’s £8 at the dog
races.
Judging from her letters, the girl’s case has a certain amount of psychological interest, but this murder probably
captured the headlines because it provided distraction amid the doodle-bugs and the anxieties of the Battle of France.
Jones and Hulten committed their murder to the tune of V1, and were convicted to the tune of V2. There was also
considerable excitement because — as has become usual in England — the man was sentenced to death and the girl to
imprisonment. According to Mr. Raymond, the reprieving of Jones caused widespread indignation and streams of telegrams
to the Home Secretary: in her native town, “SHE SHOULD HANG” was chalked on the walls beside pictures of a figure
dangling from a gallows. Considering that only ten women have been hanged in Britain this century, and that the
practice has gone out largely because of popular feeling against it, it is difficult not to feel that this clamour to
hang an eighteen-year-old girl was due partly to the brutalizing effects of war. Indeed, the whole meaningless story,
with its atmosphere of dance-halls, movie-palaces, cheap perfume, false names and stolen cars, belongs essentially to a
war period.
Perhaps it is significant that the most talked-of English murder of recent years should have been committed by an
American and an English girl who had become partly Americanized. But it is difficult to believe that this case will be
so long remembered as the old domestic poisoning dramas, product of a stable society where the all-prevailing hypocrisy
did at least ensure that crimes as serious as murder should have strong emotions behind them.
