Whenever I read phrases like ‘war guilt trials’, ‘punishment of war criminals’ and so forth, there
comes back into my mind the memory of something I saw in a prisoner-of-war camp in South Germany, earlier this
year.
Another correspondent and myself were being show round the camp by a little Viennese Jew who had been enlisted in
the branch of the American army which deals with the interrogation of prisoners. He was an alert, fair-haired, rather
good-looking youth of about twenty-five, and politically so much more knowledgeable than the average American officer
that it was a pleasure to be with him. The camp was on an airfield, and, after we had been round the cages, our guide
led us to a hangar where various prisoners who were in a different category from the others were being ‘screened’.
Up at one end of the hangar about a dozen men were lying in a row on the concrete floor. These, it was explained,
were S.S. officers who had been segregated from the other prisoners. Among them was a man in dingy civilian clothes who
was lying with his arm across his face and apparently asleep. He had strange and horribly deformed feet. The two of
them were quite symmetrical, but they were clubbed out into an extraordinary globular shape which made them more like a
horse’s hoof than anything human. As we approached the group, the little Jew seemed to be working himself up into a
state of excitement.
‘That’s the real swine!’ he said, and suddenly he lashed out with his heavy army boot and caught the prostrate man a
fearful kick right on the bulge of one of his deformed feet.
‘Get up, you swine!’ he shouted as the man started out of sleep, and then repeated something of the kind in German.
The prisoner scrambled to his feet and stood clumsily to attention. With the same air of working himself up into a fury
— indeed he was almost dancing up and down as he spoke — the Jew told us the prisoner’s history. He was a ‘real’ Nazi:
his party number indicated that he had been a member since the very early days, and he had held a post corresponding to
a General in the political branch of the S.S. It could be taken as quite certain that he had had charge of
concentration camps and had presided over tortures and hangings. In short, he represented everything that we had been
fighting against during the past five years.
Meanwhile, I was studying his appearance. Quite apart from the scrubby, unfed, unshaven look that a newly captured
man generally has, he was a disgusting specimen. But he did not look brutal or in any way frightening: merely neurotic
and, in a low way, intellectual. His pale, shifty eyes were deformed by powerful spectacles. He could have been an
unfrocked clergyman, an actor ruined by drink, or a spiritualist medium. I have seen very similar people in London
common lodging houses, and also in the Reading Room of the British Museum. Quite obviously he was mentally unbalanced —
indeed, only doubtfully sane, though at this moment sufficiently in his right mind to be frightened of getting another
kick. And yet everything that the Jew was telling me of his history could have been true, and probably was true! So the
Nazi torturer of one’s imagination, the monstrous figure against whom one had struggled for so many years, dwindled to
this pitiful wretch, whose obvious need was not for punishment, but for some kind of psychological treatment.
Later, there were further humiliations. Another S.S. officer, a large brawny man, was ordered to strip to the waist
and show the blood group number tattooed on his under-arm; another was forced to explain to us how he had lied about
being a member of the S.S. and attempted to pass himself off as an ordinary soldier of the Wehrmacht. I wondered
whether the Jew was getting any real kick out of this new-found power that he was exercising. I concluded that he
wasn’t really enjoying it, and that he was merely — like a man in a brothel, or a boy smoking his first cigar, or a
tourist traipsing round a picture gallery — TELLING himself that he was enjoying it, and behaving as he had planned to
behave in the days he was helpless.
It is absurd to blame any German or Austrian Jew for getting his own back on the Nazis. Heaven knows what scores
this particular man may have had to wipe out; very likely his whole family had been murdered; and after all, even a
wanton kick to a prisoner is a very tiny thing compared with the outrages committed by the Hitler régime. But what this
scene, and much else that I saw in Germany, brought home to me was that the whole idea of revenge and punishment is a
childish daydream. Properly speaking, there is no such thing as revenge. Revenge is an act which you want to commit
when you are powerless and because you are powerless: as soon as the sense of impotence is removed, the desire
evaporates also.
Who would not have jumped for joy, in 1940, at the thought of seeing S.S. officers kicked and humiliated? But when
the thing becomes possible, it is merely pathetic and disgusting. It is said that when Mussolini’s corpse was exhibited
in public, an old woman drew a revolver and fired five shots into it, exclaiming, ‘Those are for my five sons!’ It is
the kind of story that the newspapers make up, but it might be true. I wonder how much satisfaction she got out of
those five shots, which, doubtless, she had dreamed years earlier of firing. The condition of her being able to get
close enough to Mussolini to shoot at him was that he should be a corpse.
In so far as the big public in this country is responsible for the monstrous peace settlement now being forced on
Germany, it is because of a failure to see in advance that punishing an enemy brings no satisfaction. We acquiesce in
crimes like the expulsion of all Germans from East Prussia — crimes which in some cases we could not prevent but might
at least have protested against — because the Germans had angered and frightened us, and therefore we were certain that
when they were down we should feel no pity for them. We persist in these policies, or let others persist in them on our
behalf, because of a vague feeling that, having set out to punish Germany, we ought to go ahead and do it. Actually
there is little acute hatred of Germany left in this country, and even less, I should expect to find, in the army of
occupation. Only the minority of sadists, who must have their ‘atrocities’ from one source or another, take a keen
interest in the hunting-down of war criminals and quislings. If you asked the average man what crime Goering,
Ribbentrop, and the rest are to be charged with at their trial, he cannot tell you. Somehow the punishment of these
monsters ceases to sem attractive when it becomes possible: indeed, once under lock and key, they almost cease to be
monsters.
Unfortunately, there is often a need of some concrete incident before one can discover the real state of one’s
feelings. Here is another memory from Germany. A few hours after Stuttgart was captured by the French army, a Belgian
journalist and myself entered the town, which was still in some disorder. The Belgian had been broadcasting throughout
the war for the European Service of the BBC, and, like nearly all Frenchmen or Belgians, he had a very much tougher
attitude towards ‘the Boche’ than an Englishman or an American would have. All the main bridges into town had been
blown up, and we had to enter by a small footbridge which the Germans had evidently mad efforts to defend. A dead
German soldier was lying supine at the foot of the steps. His face was a waxy yellow. On his breast someone had laid a
bunch of the lilac which was blooming everywhere.
The Belgian averted his face as we went past. When we were well over the bridge he confided to me that this was the
first time he had seen a dead man. I suppose he was thirty five years old, and for four years he had been doing war
propaganda over the radio. For several days after this, his attitude was quite different from what it had been earlier.
He looked with disgust at the bomb-wrecked town and the humiliation the Germans were undergoing, and even on one
occasion intervened to prevent a particularly bad bit of looting. When he left, he gave the residue of the coffee we
had brought with us to the Germans on whom we were billeted. A week earlier he would probably have been scandalized at
the idea of giving coffee to a ‘Boche’. But his feelings, he told me, had undergone a change at the sight of ce pauvre
mort beside the bridge: it had suddenly brought home to him the meaning of war. And yet, if we had happened to enter
the town by another route, he might have been spared the experience of seeing one corpse out of the — perhaps — twenty
million that the war has produced.
