“In March or April, say the wiseacres, there is to be a stupendous knockout blow at Britain.
. . . What Hitler has to do it with, I cannot imagine. His ebbing and dispersed military resources are now
probably not so very much greater than the Italians’ before they were put to the test in Greece and Africa.”
“The German air power has been largely spent. It is behind the times and its first-rate men are mostly dead or
disheartened or worn out.”
“In 1914 the Hohenzollern army was the best in the world. Behind that screaming little defective in Berlin there is
nothing of the sort. . . . Yet our military ‘experts’ discuss the waiting phantom. In their imaginations it
is perfect in its equipment and invincible in discipline. Sometimes it is to strike a decisive ‘blow’ through Spain and
North Africa and on, or march through the Balkans, march from the Danube to Ankara, to Persia, to India, or ‘crush
Russia’, or ‘pour’ over the Brenner into Italy. The weeks pass and the phantom does none of these things — for one
excellent reason. It does not exist to that extent. Most of such inadequate guns and munitions as it possessed must
have been taken away from it and fooled away in Hitler’s silly feints to invade Britain. And its raw jerry-built
discipline is wilting under the creeping realisation that the Blitzkrieg is spent, and the war is coming home to
roost.”
These quotations are not taken from the CAVALRY QUARTERLY but from a series of newspaper articles by Mr H.G. Wells,
written at the beginning of this year and now reprinted in a book entitled GUIDE TO THE NEW WORLD. Since they were
written, the German army has overrun the Balkans and reconquered Cyrenaica, it can march through Turkey or Spain at
such time as may suit it, and it has undertaken the invasion of Russia. How that campaign will turn out I do not know,
but it is worth noticing that the German general staff, whose opinion is probably worth something, would not have begun
it if they had not felt fairly certain of finishing it within three months. So much for the idea that the German army
is a bogey, its equipment inadequate, its morale breaking down, etc etc.
What has Wells to set against the “screaming little defective in Berlin”? The usual rigmarole about a World State,
plus the Sankey Declaration, which is an attempted definition of fundamental human rights, of anti-totalitarian
tendency. Except that he is now especially concerned with federal world control of air power, it is the same gospel as
he has been preaching almost without interruption for the past forty years, always with an air of angry surprise at the
human beings who can fail to grasp anything so obvious.
What is the use of saying that we need federal world control of the air? The whole question is how we are to get it.
What is the use of pointing out that a World State is desirable? What matters is that not one of the five great
military powers would think of submitting to such a thing. All sensible men for decades past have been substantially in
agreement with what Mr Wells says; but the sensible men have no power and, in too many cases, no disposition to
sacrifice themselves. Hitler is a criminal lunatic, and Hitler has an army of millions of men, aeroplanes in thousands,
tanks in tens of thousands. For his sake a great nation has been willing to overwork itself for six years and then to
fight for two years more, whereas for the commonsense, essentially hedonistic world-view which Mr Wells puts forward,
hardly a human creature is willing to shed a pint of blood. Before you can even talk of world reconstruction, or even
of peace, you have got to eliminate Hitler, which means bringing into being a dynamic not necessarily the same as that
of the Nazis, but probably quite as unacceptable to “enlightened” and hedonistic people. What has kept England on its
feet during the past year? In part, no doubt, some vague idea about a better future, but chiefly the atavistic emotion
of patriotism, the ingrained feeling of the English-speaking peoples that they are superior to foreigners. For the last
twenty years the main object of English left-wing intellectuals has been to break this feeling down, and if they had
succeeded, we might be watching the SS men patrolling the London streets at this moment. Similarly, why are the
Russians fighting like tigers against the German invasion? In part, perhaps, for some half-remembered ideal of Utopian
Socialism, but chiefly in defence of Holy Russia (the “sacred soil of the Fatherland”, etc etc), which Stalin has
revived in an only slightly altered form. The energy that actually shapes the world springs from emotions — racial
pride, leader-worship, religious belief, love of war — which liberal intellectuals mechanically write off as
anachronisms, and which they have usually destroyed so completely in themselves as to have lost all power of
action.
The people who say that Hitler is Antichrist, or alternatively, the Holy Ghost, are nearer an understanding of the
truth than the intellectuals who for ten dreadful years have kept it up that he is merely a figure out of comic opera,
not worth taking seriously. All that this idea really reflects is the sheltered conditions of English life. The Left
Book Club was at bottom a product of Scotland Yard, just as the Peace Pledge Union is a product of the navy. One
development of the last ten years has been the appearance of the “political book”, a sort of enlarged pamphlet
combining history with political criticism, as an important literary form. But the best writers in this line — Trotsky,
Rauschning, Rosenberg, Silone, Borkenau, Koestler and others — have none of them been Englishmen, and nearly all of
them have been renegades from one or other extremist party, who have seen totalitarianism at close quarters and known
the meaning of exile and persecution. Only in the English-speaking countries was it fashionable to believe, right up to
the outbreak of war, that Hitler was an unimportant lunatic and the German tanks made of cardboard. Mr Wells, it will
be seen from the quotations I have given above, believes something of the kind still. I do not suppose that either the
bombs or the German campaign in Greece have altered his opinion. A lifelong habit of thought stands between him and an
understanding of Hitler’s power.
Mr Wells, like Dickens, belongs to the non-military middle class. The thunder of guns, the jingle of spurs, the
catch in the throat when the old flag goes by, leave him manifestly cold. He has an invincible hatred of the fighting,
hunting, swashbuckling side of life, symbolised in all his early books by a violent propaganda against horses. The
principal villain of his OUTLINE OF HISTORY is the military adventurer, Napoleon. If one looks through nearly any book
that he has written in the last forty years one finds the same idea constantly recurring: the supposed antithesis
between the man of science who is working towards a planned World State and the reactionary who is trying to restore a
disorderly past. In novels, Utopias, essays, films, pamphlets, the antithesis crops up, always more or less the same.
On the one side science, order, progress, internationalism, aeroplanes, steel, concrete, hygiene: on the other side
war, nationalism, religion, monarchy, peasants, Greek professors, poets, horses. History as he sees it is a series of
victories won by the scientific man over the romantic man. Now, he is probably right in assuming that a “reasonable”,
planned form of society, with scientists rather than witch-doctors in control, will prevail sooner or later, but that
is a different matter from assuming that it is just round the corner. There survives somewhere or other an interesting
controversy which took place between Wells and Churchill at the time of the Russian Revolution. Wells accuses Churchill
of not really believing his own propaganda about the Bolsheviks being monsters dripping with blood etc, but of merely
fearing that they were going to introduce an era of common sense and scientific control, in which flag-wavers like
Churchill himself would have no place. Churchill’s estimate of the Bolsheviks, however, was nearer the mark than
Wells’s. The early Bolsheviks may have been angels or demons, according as one chooses to regard them, but at any rate
they were not sensible men. They were not introducing a Wellsian Utopia but a Rule of the Saints, which, like the
English Rule of the Saints, was a military despotism enlivened by witchcraft trials. The same misconception reappears
in an inverted form in Wells’s attitude to the Nazis. Hitler is all the war-lords and witchdoctors in history rolled
into one. Therefore, argues Wells, he is an absurdity, a ghost from the past, a creature doomed to disappear almost
immediately. But unfortunately the equation of science with common sense does not really hold good. The aeroplane,
which was looked forward to as a civilising influence but in practice has hardly been used except for dropping bombs,
is the symbol of that fact. Modern Germany is far more scientific than England, and far more barbarous. Much of what
Wells has imagined and worked for is physically there in Nazi Germany. The order, the planning, the State encouragement
of science, the steel, the concrete, the aeroplanes, are all there, but all in the service of ideas appropriate to the
Stone Age. Science is fighting on the side of superstition. But obviously it is impossible for Wells to accept this. It
would contradict the world-view on which his own works are based. The war-lords and the witch-doctors MUST fail, the
common-sense World State, as seen by a nineteenth-century liberal whose heart does not leap at the sound of bugles,
MUST triumph. Treachery and defeatism apart, Hitler CANNOT be a danger. That he should finally win would be an
impossible reversal of history, like a Jacobite restoration.
But is it not a sort of parricide for a person of my age (thirty-eight) to find fault with H.G. Wells? Thinking
people who were born about the beginning of this century are in some sense Wells’s own creation. How much influence any
mere writer has, and especially a “popular” writer whose work takes effect quickly, is questionable, but I doubt
whether anyone who was writing books between 1900 and 1920, at any rate in the English language, influenced the young
so much. The minds of all of us, and therefore the physical world, would be perceptibly different if Wells had never
existed. Only, just the singleness of mind, the one-sided imagination that made him seem like an inspired prophet in
the Edwardian age, make him a shallow, inadequate thinker now. When Wells was young, the antithesis between science and
reaction was not false. Society was ruled by narrow-minded, profoundly incurious people, predatory businessmen, dull
squires, bishops, politicians who could quote Horace but had never heard of algebra. Science was faintly disreputable
and religious belief obligatory. Traditionalism, stupidity, snobbishness, patriotism, superstition and love of war
seemed to be all on the same side; there was need of someone who could state the opposite point of view. Back in the
nineteen-hundreds it was a wonderful experience for a boy to discover H.G. Wells. There you were, in a world of
pedants, clergymen and golfers, with your future employers exhorting you to “get on or get out”, your parents
systematically warping your sexual life, and your dull-witted schoolmasters sniggering over their Latin tags; and here
was this wonderful man who could tell you about the inhabitants of the planets and the bottom of the sea, and who knew
that the future was not going to be what respectable people imagined. A decade or so before aeroplanes were technically
feasible Wells knew that within a little while men would be able to fly. He knew that because he himself wanted to be
able to fly, and therefore felt sure that research in that direction would continue. On the other hand, even when I was
a little boy, at a time when the Wright brothers had actually lifted their machine off the ground for fifty-nine
seconds, the generally accepted opinion was that if God had meant us to fly He would have given us wings. Up to 1914
Wells was in the main a true prophet. In physical details his vision of the new world has been fulfilled to a
surprising extent.
But because he belonged to the nineteenth century and to a non-military nation and class, he could not grasp the
tremendous strength of the old world which was symbolised in his mind by fox-hunting Tories. He was, and still is,
quite incapable of understanding that nationalism, religious bigotry and feudal loyalty are far more powerful forces
than what he himself would describe as sanity. Creatures out of the Dark Ages have come marching into the present, and
if they are ghosts they are at any rate ghosts which need a strong magic to lay them. The people who have shown the
best understanding of Fascism are either those who have suffered under it or those who have a Fascist streak in
themselves. A crude book like THE IRON HEEL, written nearly thirty years ago, is a truer prophecy of the future than
either BRAVE NEW WORLD or THE SHAPE OF THINGS TO COME. If one had to choose among Wells’s own contemporaries a writer
who could stand towards him as a corrective, one might choose Kipling, who was not deaf to the evil voices of power and
military “glory”. Kipling would have understood the appeal of Hitler, or for that matter of Stalin, whatever his
attitude towards them might be. Wells is too sane to understand the modern world. The succession of lower-middle-class
novels which are his greatest achievement stopped short at the other war and never really began again, and since 1920
he has squandered his talents in slaying paper dragons. But how much it is, after all, to have any talents to
squander.
